I TO
WHAT TENDS TO HAPPEN
THESE IN-PERSON GATHERINGS WE
WE HEAR A SET OF PRESENTATIONS
FROM MOM, FROM STAFF AND OTHERS
THE THAT COUNCIL MEMBERS ARE
CERTAINLY ABLE TO ASK QUESTIONS
DURING THE COURSE OF THE
PRESENTATION AND ALTHOUGH YOU
MIGHT WISH TO TO HOLD OFF UNTIL
THE END OF THE PRESENTATION,
THE COUNCIL MEMBERS IN TERMS
OF IN TERMS OF SPEAKING TIMES,
WE TEND NOT TO HEW TO THE THREE
MINUTE RULE HERE AT WORK
SESSIONS BUT WE DO ASK PEOPLE
TO BE COOL AND AND SO YOU KNOW,
YOU'LL HOLD THE FLOOR FOR AS
LONG AS YOUR QUESTIONS WILL
HOLD THE FLOOR AND IF IT'S
GOING A LITTLE LONGER I MIGHT
JUST GENTLY REQUEST THAT THAT
BE POSTPONED UNTIL ANOTHER TIME
AND THEN EVEN WE'LL TALK FOR AS
LONG AS WE TALK.
THE PRESENTATIONS I THINK WILL
GO FOR ABOUT AN HOUR.
I GATHER WE WILL THEN HAVE
COUNCIL QUESTIONS.
THERE IS A HARD STOP IN OUR
COUNCIL RULES AT EIGHT FORTY
FIVE I WILL OBSERVE THAT THAT
IS JUST A COUNCIL RULE.
IT'S NOT LAW AND SO WE HAVE ON
FREQUENT OCCASION AS A COUNCIL
HAS DECIDED TO GO THROUGH THAT
AND FINNISH COUNCIL QUESTIONS
AFTER COUNCIL QUESTIONS WE HAVE
PUBLIC COMMENT.
THERE IS NO SIGN UP FOR PUBLIC
COMMENT.
IT'S ANYONE WHO WISHES TO SPEAK
DOES HAVE THEIR THREE MINUTES
IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
AND SO THAT'S THAT'S ROLLING
AFTER PUBLIC COMMENT.
THEN THERE ARE COMMUNICATIONS
AND COUNCIL FOR THIS STANDARD
ORDINARY PURPOSES AND THEN
FINALLY AN ADJOURNMENT.
THAT'S HOW THESE THINGS TEND TO
RUN.
EXCELLENT.
MR. DE HONI, THE ENERGY OPTIONS
ANALYSIS REPORT
THAT WORK WAS
CONTRACTED OUT TO A CONSULTING
FIRM.
WE HAVE BEEN ENGAGED IN THE
PROCESS FOR MANY MONTHS.
WE'RE HERE THIS EVENING TO
PRESENT THE REPORT THAT WE HAVE
WILL TURN THINGS OVER TO DR.
MESI STULTS OUTSIDE RECHTER AND
YOU WILL ALSO ULTIMATELY HEAR
FROM THE CONSULTANTS
THEMSELVES.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, ADMINISTRATOR TONY
AND THANK YOU MAYOR AND MEMBERS
OF CITY COUNCIL FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO BE HERE TONIGHT.
I JUST WANT TO RUN THROUGH WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO IN THE
SESSION SO YOU HAVE A LITTLE
BIT OF BIOMARKERS HERE.
FIRST I'M GOING TO ONLY SPEAK
AT THE END TO REMIND US THE
SCOPE OF THIS ANALYSIS AS WELL
AS WHAT THIS ANALYSIS WAS NOT
MEANT TO ANSWER SO WE CAN KIND
OF KEEP THAT IN FRAME.
THEN WE ARE GOING TO HEAR FROM
AMERICAN PULSE THAT DID A
PUBLIC SURVEY LOOKING AT THE
PUBLIC SENTIMENT AROUND OUR
ENERGY SYSTEM THAT'LL BE
FOLLOWED BY A PRESENTATION FROM
FIVE LEAKS ABOUT THEIR
TECHNICAL REPORT ON THE ENERGY
OPTIONS AND THEN THERE ARE SOME
PRELIMINARY THOUGHTS AND WE'LL
GO TO OPEN DISCUSSION.
SO THAT'S SORT OF THE
TRAJECTORY FOR TODAY JUMPING IN
AS A REMINDER FOR THE SCOPE
COUNCIL ASKED US AND WE HIRED A
TEAM TO CREATE AN ENERGY
OPTIONS ANALYSIS THAT PROVIDES
DETAILS ABOUT THE VARIOUS
PATHWAYS WE COULD TAKE TO
ACHIEVE OUR CLEAN ENERGY GOALS
WHICH IS ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY BY THE
YEAR 2030 WE ARE ALSO ASKED TO
CONDUCT AN ELECTRIC UTILITY
CIVILIZATION FEASIBILITY STUDY
ALSO KNOWN AS A PHASE ONE
FEASIBILITY STUDY AND WE ASKED
FOR
A CONSULTANT TO CONDUCT A
TWO PHASE RATE ANALYSIS FOR A
POTENTIAL MUNICIPAL SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY UTILITY AND WE ARE DOING
THAT.
WE WANTED ALSO TO EVALUATE LOTS
OF DIFFERENT ENERGY OPTIONS.
WHAT I JUST TALKED ABOUT BEFORE
WERE UTILITY STRUCTURES BUT WE
NEEDED TO UNDERSTAND WHAT ARE
THE PATHWAYS OF ENERGY
PROCUREMENT PATHWAYS TO HIT THE
THAT HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE
ENERGY GOAL AND IN ACHIEVING
THAT EVALUATE THE DIFFERENT
OPTIONS THAT ARE PRESENTED AND
AVAILABLE TO US BASED ON THE
VALUES AND CRITERIA WE'VE
ESTABLISHED THAT INCLUDES
LOOKING AT THINGS LIKE THE
CITY'S ENERGY CRITERIA AND
PRINCIPLES.
OF COURSE OUR TWO ZERO GOALS
ARE COMMITMENTS TO EQUITY
TRANSFORMATION AND
SUSTAINABILITY WITHIN A TWO
ZERO AND THEN A GOAL
OF ACHIEVING JUST TRANSITION
FOR WORKERS.
AS WE THINK ABOUT THIS
TRANSITION.
SO I WANT TO KNOW TWO THINGS.
WE ALSO DID THIS SURVEY WHICH
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT IN A
SECOND AND THAT SURVEY TO ME IS
REALLY IMPORTANT BECAUSE IT WAS
A RANDOMIZED SURVEY AND IT
HELPS US UNDERSTAND WHAT THE
COMMUNITY IS LOOKING FOR IN ITS
ENERGY SYSTEM.
I ALSO WANT TO POINT OUT WE DID
NOT ASK FOR STUDY ON
RELIABILITY.
THE REPORTS AND THE FINDINGS
YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR ABOUT
TODAY DO NOT LOOK AT THE COST
OF IMPROVING RELIABILITY.
THAT IS A VERY IMPORTANT
DISTINCTION BECAUSE AS YOU WILL
HEAR, IT IS VERY IMPORTANT TO
THE PUBLIC THAT WE IMPROVE
RELIABILITY.
ALSO, THIS IS NOT STAFF'S
RECOMMENDATION.
WHAT YOU ARE TO HEAR IS FROM
THE CONSULTANT ONLY STAFF ARE
GOING TO NEED SIGNIFICANT TIME
TO PROCESS THIS REPORT TO DOVE
INTO THE MODELS TO UNDERSTAND
THE ASSUMPTIONS AND COME BACK
TO COUNCIL WITH
RECOMMENDATIONS.
SO WHAT YOU ARE RECEIVING
TONIGHT IS MERELY THE WONDERFUL
WORK OF OUR CONSULTANTS.
PLEASE DO NOT PERCEIVE THIS AS
A RECOMMENDATION FROM CITY
STAFF.
AND THEN LASTLY JUST KIND OF A
FORMALITY WE ARE GOING TO DO
THE AS I MENTIONED THE SURVEY
FIRST FEEL FREE TO ASK
QUESTIONS IN BETWEEN DON'T HOLD
IF YOU'VE GOT QUESTIONS ON THAT
SURVEY, LET'S GET THOSE OUT AND
THEN WE'LL GO TO THE TECHNICAL
REPORT.
OK, SO WITH THAT I THINK WE'RE
GOING TO INVITE IN DUSTIN FROM
AMERICAN PULSE TO PROVIDE AN
OVERVIEW OF THE PUBLIC SURVEY.
EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU MR YOU APPRECIATE
BEING HERE THIS EVENING WITH
THE CITY COUNCIL AND MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITY AND I'M HIS
ALSO THE MANAGING PARTNER
OF AMERICAN SCHOOLS RESEARCH
AND POLLING AND WE HAD THE
GREAT PLEASURE TO CONDUCT THIS
SURVEY FOR THE COMMUNITY AND
LEARN A LOT OF GREAT THINGS.
SO FIRST OF ALL AND I BELIEVE
YOU'VE BEEN PROVIDED SOME
SLIDES TO GO ALONG WITH THIS A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT YOURSELVES.
WE'VE BEEN IN DOING SURVEY
RESEARCH FOR ABOUT FIFTEEN
YEARS AND WE'RE KNOWN IN
PARTICULAR FOR A MULTIMODAL
APPROACH TO SURVEYS WHERE WE
HAVE OUR LIVE TELEPHONE
INTERVIEWS DONE WITH WITH OUR
LIVE AGENTS.
WE ALSO DO TEXT LAB.
WE DO ON MY PANEL WE DO WHAT'S
CALLED EBARB IN THIS SURVEY
WE'LL TALK ABOUT THE MOMENT
ABOUT THE METHODOLOGY THAT WE
USED A FEW OF THOSE DIFFERENT
MODES AND ONE OF THE THINGS I'M
PROUD TO SAY IS THAT IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO WERE NOTED FOR
ACCURACY 91 PERCENT.
NINETY EIGHT PERCENT WITHIN THE
MARGIN OF ERROR.
ALSO UNIQUE ABOUT US IS THAT WE
OPERATE OUR OWN CALL CENTERS SO
WE CONTROL THE PROCESS FROM
BEGINNING TO END SO THAT WE CAN
ENSURE THE INTEGRITY OF THE OUT
OF SO GO TO THE METHODOLOGY
OF THIS SURVEY ON THE NEXT
SLIDE.
THIS WAS A SURVEY OF LIKELY
VOTERS IN THE CITY IN ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
IT WAS CONDUCTED BETWEEN AUGUST
20TH AND SEPTEMBER 5TH.
WE HAVE A SURVEY SAMPLE OF 412
RESPONSES AND THAT IS FROM A
RANDOM SAMPLE THE MARGIN THERE
IS A NINETY FIVE PERCENT
CONFIDENCE INTERVAL IS PLUS OR
MINUS FOUR POINT EIGHT PERCENT
AND THIS IS WHAT I WHAT WE CALL
MULTIMODAL OR A HYBRID AND
PARTICULARLY WE DID LIVE
ANSWERS OR LIVE AGENTS TALKING
TO TO RESIDENTS WITHIN THE CITY
AND THAT WAS FIFTY THREE POINT
NINE PERCENT OF THE THE SURVEY
ONLINE PANEL.
SO PEOPLE CONDUCTED THIS ON THE
COMPUTERS THAT WAS IN CELL
PHONES.
I WAS TWENTY THREE POINT FIVE
PERCENT BY WAY OF THE PANEL AND
THEN WHAT WE CALL TEXT LAB
WHERE WE TEXTED RESPONDENTS AND
THAT WAS TWENTY TWO POINT SIX
PERCENT OF THE THE SURVEY WE
LIKE THE SURVEY HAS MORE THAN
HALF OF THE SURVEY IS USING OUR
GOLD STANDARD LIVES RESPONSES
WHERE A REAL PERSON TALK TO A
REAL PERSON AND ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT'S REALLY IMPORTANT
ABOUT THIS IS THAT WE GOT A
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE OF THE
COMMUNITY THAT REFLECTS THE
DEMOGRAPHICS AND AND BECAUSE
THE RANDOM SAMPLE WORKED VERY
WELL, WE WERE ABLE TO MINIMALLY
WAIT BASED ON AGE, GENDER, RACE
AND ETHNICITY AND ZIP CODE TO
ENSURE THAT EVERY POCKET OF THE
CITY WAS INCLUDED INTO THE
SAMPLE OF LET'S GO TO THE NEXT
SLIDE AND REALLY THE BIG
PICTURE WE'RE GOING TO GO OVER
FIVE MAIN INSIGHTS THAT WE'VE
HAD FROM THE SURVEY AND THE
CITY OF STAFF HAVE OTHER
COMPONENTS TO THIS BESIDES THE
SLIDES.
BUT THESE REALLY ARE THE THINGS
THAT WE SAW WERE THE BIG
TAKEAWAYS APPROPRIATE HERE?
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE DID
IS SURVEY AND YOU CAN SEE THERE
AT THE TOP THE SLIDE WE GAVE
PEOPLE A CHANCE TO DO WHAT WE
CALL OPEN ENDED QUESTIONS AND
FOR VERBATIM QUESTIONS THAT WE
GIVE PEOPLE COULD ACTUALLY GIVE
US THEIR RESPONSES DIRECTLY IN
THEIR OWN WORDS AND THEN OUR
AGENTS TAKE THOSE DOWN WORD FOR
WORD AND THIS WHAT I THOUGHT
WAS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BIG
PICTURE TAKEAWAYS.
THIS IS A RETIRED CAUCASIAN
FEMALE 70 PLUS WHO IS A HIGH
SCHOOL GRADUATE AND GENERALLY
SUPPORTIVE OF THE TWENTY THIRTY
GOAL AND SHE SAYS THAT WE DON'T
LOSE ENERGY AND I DON'T WANT
OUR PROPERTY TAX TO PAY FOR IT.
SO THAT'S GENERALLY WE'LL SEE
IN A MOMENT.
THERE ARE THREE BIG TAKEAWAYS
FOR THE FUTURE OF ENERGY IN THE
CITY PERSPECTIVES ON THE CITY'S
2030 RENEWABLE ENERGY GOAL
SOMETHING THAT WE TESTED IN OUR
QUESTIONS THE PRIORITIES, WHAT
PEOPLE ACTUALLY THOUGHT WAS
IMPORTANT TO TO ADDRESS AND
THEN SOME RESPONSES TO POLICY
OPTIONS IN PEOPLE'S OWN WORDS
AND THIS NEXT SLIDE IS REALLY
THE BIG TAKEAWAY WHAT I CALL
INSIGHT NUMBER ONE RESILIENCE,
RELIABILITY AND COST ARE
PARAMOUNT AND YOU CAN SEE THE
GRAPH BELOW THIS IS WELL BEYOND
THE MARGIN OF ERROR FOR THE TOP
THREE RESIDENTS REALLY DID MAKE
A PRIORITY ON RESILIENCE AND
RESILIENCE IN THIS CASE IS
BEING ABLE TO KEEP POWERED
AFTER LIKE AN EXTREME WEATHER
EVENT THEN RELIABILITY THAT'S
THE DAY TO DAY EVERY EVERY DAY
BEING ABLE TO GET THEIR
ELECTRICITY AND THEN COST AND
YOU CAN SEE THAT RELIABILITY
COSTS ARE STATISTICALLY TIED AT
FORTY EIGHT POINT SIX PERCENT
AND 48 PERCENT OF SO THOSE WERE
THE BIGGEST TAKEAWAYS FROM THE
SURVEY.
GO TO THE NEXT ONE IS A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT THIS, A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT RESILIENCE THIS WEEK
THE NUMBER ONE ACROSS ALL
DEMOGRAPHICS.
SIXTY SIX PERCENT SELECTED AS
THEIR TOP THREE PRIORITY AND I
CAN EXPLAIN THAT IN A MOMENT
WHAT THAT MEANS AND THEN WHEN
WE ASK THE VERBATIM QUESTIONS
BEING ABLE TO WITHSTAND THE
STORM WAS THE TOP FOR MADE THEM
SO AT THE ONE OF THE THINGS I
THINK WAS IMPORTANT ABOUT HOW
WE STRUCTURED THE SURVEY
INSTRUMENT IN THIS IS THAT WE
ASKED PEOPLE THEIR PRIORITIES
WHAT WAS IMPORTANT TO THEM
BASICALLY THREE DIFFERENT WAYS
WE DID IT FIRST AS A STANDALONE
STANDALONE ISSUES AND JUST GAVE
PEOPLE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
RESPOND TO THAT.
WE GAVE THEM THE ABILITY TO
RANK THEM AS THEIR TOP THREE
WHAT WE CALL MULTI SELECT
QUESTION AND THEN WE GAVE THEM
THE OPPORTUNITY IN AN OPEN
ENDED QUESTION TO JUST TELL US
IN THEIR OWN WORDS WHAT WAS THE
MOST IMPORTANT IN THESE.
AND SO WHEN I MENTIONED
VERBATIM THAT'S WHAT I'M
TALKING ABOUT.
THAT'S THAT LAST QUESTION WHERE
THEY WERE ABLE TO TELL US IN
THEIR OWN WORDS WHAT WAS MOST
IMPORTANT TO THEM.
AND WHEN I'M TALKING ABOUT THE
TOP THREE, I'M TALKING ABOUT
WHERE THEY GOT THE PICK OUT
OF THE LIST AND OVER THE LIST
THE SECOND WHICH WERE THEIR TOP
THREE PRIORITIES AND THEN WE
TESTED THEM INDIVIDUALLY TO
BEGIN THE SURVEY.
SO IT GAVE PEOPLE MULTIPLE WAYS
TO THINK ABOUT IT AND IT WAS
FAIRLY CONSISTENT ACROSS SO ON
RELIABILITY OVERALL NUMBER TWO
PRIORITY AMONG RESIDENTS FORTY
EIGHT POINT SIX PERCENT
SELECTED AS THE TOP THREE
PRIORITY AND IN THE VERBATIM
ANSWER QUOTE WITHSTANDING
ROUTINE DISTURBANCES WAS NUMBER
TWO AND THEN ON COST OVERALL
COST WAS NUMBER THREE AS A
PRIORITY.
FORTY EIGHT PERCENT SELECTED AS
A TOP THREE PRIORITY AND THEN
ENERGY COST AS A QUOTE ENERGY
COST WAS NUMBER THREE AND FOUR
BEDROOM.
WE'LL GO TO THE NEXT BIN.
BEFORE WE JUMP INTO THIS ONE, I
WANT TO GIVE AN EXAMPLE OF THE
THE DIFFERENT TOPICS
OF DIFFERENT SOLUTIONS
DIFFERENT THE THINGS, THE SCOPE
OF IT GENERALLY.
SO WE ASK QUESTIONS AROUND THE
RENEWABLE ENERGY IN TRANSITION
TO RENEWABLES.
WE ASK QUESTIONS AROUND
AFFORDABILITY.
RESILIENCE, AROUND LOCAL
WE ASK QUESTIONS AROUND
CONTROL AND COMMUNITY OWNED
RESILIENCE, AROUND LOCAL
ENERGY ABOUT MICHIGAN BASED
CONTROL AND COMMUNITY OWNED
RESOURCES.
ENERGY ABOUT MICHIGAN BASED
WE ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT HAVING
RESOURCES.
THIS IN PLACE BY 2030 AND
WE ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT HAVING
MEETING THAT CURRENT GOAL BEING
THIS IN PLACE BY 2030 AND
A MODEL FOR OTHER COMMUNITIES
MEETING THAT CURRENT GOAL BEING
RELIABILITY.
A MODEL FOR OTHER COMMUNITIES
SO ALL THESE TOPICS WERE
RELIABILITY.
COVERED THROUGHOUT GOING TO
SO ALL THESE TOPICS WERE
STRATEGIC INSIGHT NO TO
THERE
IS DEFINITELY FOLKS IN THE CITY
HAVE DONE A GOOD JOB.
THERE'S DEFINITELY A HIGH
PUBLIC AWARENESS OF THE ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE
ENERGY GOAL WITHIN THE
COMMUNITY IS YOU CAN SEE NEARLY
SEVENTY SIX PERCENT
OF RESPONDENTS ARE WHERE THE
ANN ARBOR IS SEEKING TO
TRANSITION TO 100 PERCENT
RENEWABLE ENERGY.
BASED ON MY EXPERIENCE THAT'S A
PRETTY NOTABLE ACHIEVEMENT ONLY
SIX PERCENT REPORTED HAVING NO
KNOWLEDGE OF THIS INITIATIVE
AND THIRTY POINT TWO PERCENT
SAID THEY HAD HEARD A LOT ABOUT
IT NEXT.
AND WE SPECIFICALLY WANTED TO
PASS BETWEEN THESE TWO FACTORS
BETWEEN THE 2030 GOAL AND THEN
ALSO THE ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
RENEWABLES GOAL.
SO WE TESTED THOSE SEPARATELY
AND ON INSIGHT NUMBER THREE,
RESIST AND SUPPORT THE TWENTY
THIRD GOAL AS YOU SEE NEARLY 60
PERCENT WOULD LIKE TO SEE THAT
HAPPEN AND AND ALSO
ADDITIONALLY 62 POINT SIX
PERCENT FIND ACHIEVING THIS BY
2030 IS ALSO IMPORTANT.
WE HAVE A GENTLEMAN HERE THAT
WE QUOTE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
2030 FEELS AGGRESSIVELY
ACHIEVABLE IS WHAT A CAUCASIAN
MAN IN HIS 30S WITH A
BACHELOR'S DEGREE SAID TO OUR
OUR QUESTION THAT I'M GOING TO
CITE NUMBER FOUR THERE'S
CONSENSUS ON ALL CRITERIA BUT
INTENSITY FAVORS THREE.
SO A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
INTENSITY.
SO YOU KNOW, IF YOU'RE GIVEN A
LIST OF A BUNCH OF DIFFERENT
THINGS THAT YOU THINK YOU'RE
ASKING WHAT'S IMPORTANT?
YOU MAY LIKE ALL OF THOSE AND I
WILL SAY IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO
NOTE THAT THERE REALLY WAS
NOTHING THAT WE TESTED.
THE PEOPLE DISLIKE EVERY IDEA
EVERY SOLUTION THAT WAS TESTED
WAS LIKED BY THE PUBLIC BUT
THEY DID MAKE CLEAR THERE WAS
THINGS THAT THEY PRIORITIZED.
SO IN THIS CASE WE ASKED A
QUESTION ABOUT IS THIS
IMPORTANT TO YOU?
IS A VERY IMPORTANT OR SOMEWHAT
IMPORTANT?
SO WE MAKE A DECISION THERE AND
WE BROKE THIS OUT BASED OFF
OF PEOPLE WHO SAID VERY
IMPORTANT VERSUS SOMEONE
IMPORTANT.
SO ON THE RESULTS QUESTION
WHICH IS QUESTION TEN PEOPLE
SAY OVERALL EIGHTY SIX POINT
ONE PERCENT SAYS TOTAL
IMPORTANT BUT VERY IMPORTANT.
SIXTY THREE POINT NINE PERCENT
AND ON RELIABILITY EIGHTY FIVE
POINT TWO PERCENT TOTAL SAID IT
WAS IMPORTANT THAT FIFTY NINE
POINT ONE PERCENT SAY WAS VERY
IMPORTANT THAT I COST SEVENTY
TWO POINT FIVE PERCENT SAID IT
WAS IMPORTANT BUT FORTY SEVEN
POINT ONE PERCENT SAID THE VERY
IMPORTANT AND FOUR ARE
DISTINCT.
SHOULD WE CONSIDER ANYTHING
WHERE THE PUBLIC SAYS MORE THAN
40 PERCENT IS VERY IMPORTANT
THAT MEANS THAT THERE'S SOME
INTENSITY BEHIND IT THAT THERE
ARE WILLING TO TO REALLY YOU
KNOW, GO OUT THERE AND SAY THAT
WAS VERY IMPORTANT TO THEM, GO
TO THE NEXT ONE FOR INSIGHT
NUMBER FIVE, THIS IS DEPENDING
ON WHO YOU'RE TALKING TO, IT'S
EITHER STATISTICALLY TIED FOR
THIRD OR SECOND BY DEPENDING ON
THE THE GROUP IT MIGHT BE A
LITTLE BIT MORE IMPORTANT AS WE
WENT THROUGH THE THROUGH THE
VERBATIM RESPONSES IN
PARTICULAR WHEN WE GIVE PEOPLE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO RANK THE TOP
THREE AND THEN ALSO
PARTICULARLY WHEN WE SAID IN
YOUR OWN WORDS WHAT DO YOU
THINK IS IMPORTANT PEOPLE
PEOPLE TOLD US SO HERE'S AN
EXAMPLE OF WHAT AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MALE IN HIS
40S WHO MAKES OVER A HUNDRED
FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS SAID TO
NUMBER FOURTEEN THE QUESTION
NUMBER 14 NEXT SURVEY AND HE
ALSO SAYS THAT HIS NUMBER ONE
PRIORITY IS RESILIENTLY SO HE
SAYS THAT'S IMPORTANT TO HIM.
BUT HE HE ALSO ADDED THIS COVID
JUST KEEP IT AFFORDABLE.
THE COST OF LIVING IS QUITE
HIGH IN THE CIVIL.
SO I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU A FEW
DIFFERENT BREAKDOWNS ON THOSE
SO THOSE MAKING UNDER SEVENTY
FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS THEIR TOP
THREE CONCERNS FIRST WAS
RESILIENT FIFTY SIX POINT THREE
PERCENT ABOVE FOR COST.
THAT WAS NUMBER TWO AT FIFTY
POINT THREE PERCENT WHICH IS
OUTSIDE THE MARGIN OF ERROR
OVER RELIABILITY AT FORTY TWO
POINT SIX PERCENT FOR NONWHITE
MINORITY POPULATIONS.
THE TOP THREE CONCERNS FIRST
BRAZILIAN'S SIXTY FOUR PERCENT
AND THEN TOSSES AT FIFTY POINT
EIGHT PERCENT AND THEN
RELIABILITY AT FORTY THREE
POINT NINE PERCENT AND THEN
THOSE UNDER FORTY YEARS OF AGE
IT WAS RESILIENCE AT SIXTY SIX
POINT FOUR PERCENT AND THEN
STATISTICALLY TIED WITH COST
JUST A BIT AHEAD WAS FIFTY ONE
POINT FIVE PERCENT PORTION
LIABILITY AT FORTY NINE POINT
ONE PERCENT.
SO THOSE ARE THE OVERALL
OVERALL TAKEAWAYS WE HAD FROM
THE SURVEY.
HERE'S SOME RESIDENTS IN THEIR
OWN WORDS ON WHAT WE SAW AS THE
THREE TOP PRIORITIES FROM THE
PUBLIC ON MAINTAINING POWER
DURING AND AFTER AN EXTREME
EVENT WHICH WAS AGAIN SIXTY SIX
PERCENT HAD THAT AS A TOP
PRIORITY.
FIRST QUOTE POWER REMAINS AFTER
BIG EVENTS PUSHING TOWARD
RESPONSIVE WEATHER RELATED
EVENTS WHEN POWER GOES OUT THAT
WAS ANOTHER ONE AND THEN THIRD
QUOTE FROM A LOCAL RESIDENT
ANYTHING RELATED TO RESILIENCY
WOULD BE MY PRAYER THEN
IMPROVING RELIABILITY DURING
ROUTINE DISTURBANCES FORTY SIX
FORTY EIGHT POINT SIX PERCENT
AND THREE RESIDENTS SAID
ALLOWING FOR CONTINUED POWER
DURING DISTURBANCES.
ANOTHER PERSON SAID STABLE
POWER ACCESS.
ANOTHER PERSON SAID THE OUTAGES
ARE BAD SO JUST HAVING POWER
AND THEN ON THE THIRD ONE
ENSURING ENERGY COSTS ARE AT
LEAST THE SAME COST AS TODAY.
THAT'S FORTY EIGHT PERCENT AND
THE FIRST QUOTE I THINK KEEPING
COSTS LOW OR THE SAME AS WHAT
WE PAY NOW ANOTHER PERSON SAID
EVERYTHING MAKING SURE PEOPLE
CAN AFFORD ENERGY AND THEN
ANOTHER PERSON SAID I HOPE THAT
WE STILL HAVE THE SAME THE COST
AND OVERALL THE BOTTOM LINE
THAT WE TOOK AWAY FROM THE
PUBLIC'S INPUT THROUGH THE
SURVEY IS THAT RESILIENCE,
RELIABILITY AND COST ARE THE
TOP PRIORITIES.
BUT THEY LIKE EVERYTHING THAT
THE CITY HAS BEEN LOOKING AT,
EVERYTHING THAT WE TESTED WAS
WAS LIKED BUT ULTIMATELY THIS
IS WHAT PEOPLE SAID WHERE THE
PRIORITIES AND THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
WE REALLY APPRECIATE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE THIS TIME
AND TO WORK ON THIS PROJECT
WITH WITH THE CITY AND TO
HOPEFULLY BE PART OF MAKING
THIS TRANSITION HAPPEN FOR THE
RESIDENTS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS FROM
COUNSEL WITH RESPECT TO THIS
PORTION OF THE PRESENTATION
?
THANK YOU AGAIN.
APPRECIATE YOUR I APPRECIATE
YOUR WORK ON THE AND THE
RESULTS.
THANK THANK YOU DR. STULTZ.
GREAT.
SO NOW I'M GOING TO TURN IT
OVER TO DOUGLAS JUSTER FROM THE
FIVE LAKES ENERGY TEAM WHO WAS
THE LEAD CONSULTANT WITH A
GROUP OF CONSULTANTS TO WALK US
THROUGH THEIR FINDINGS IN THE
TECHNICAL ENERGY OPTIONS REPORT
.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH AS I SAID,
I'M DOUGLAS CESTARO, MANAGING
PARTNER OF FIVE LAKES ENERGY.
I AM JOINED TONIGHT TO ANSWER
YOUR QUESTIONS BY TIM LUNDGREN
AND JUSTIN ROOMS OF THE POTOMAC
LAW GROUP.
THEY WERE REMOTE SCOTT BURNHAM
FROM NEW GEN STRATEGIES.
HE IS ALSO REMOTE IS OUT IN
COLORADO I BELIEVE TONIGHT AND
THEIR PRIMARY ROLE WAS THE
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS OF A
MUNICIPAL IZATION OPTION HERE
IN THE ROOM I HAVE JOKA FROM
SUNSTAR WHO DID A LOT OF THE
WORK ON THE SOLAR OPPORTUNITIES
WITHIN THE CITY AND SOME OTHER
PARTS OF THE PROJECT AND RICK
BUNCH FROM FIVE LAKES ENERGY
WHO ALSO DID MUCH OF THE OTHER
WORK THAT'S IN THE REPORT.
SO I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU AN
OVERVIEW HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT YOU HAVE EITHER
AS WE GO ALONG AT THE END
TO
BEGIN WITH.
I THINK IT'S HELPFUL TO HAVE A
PICTURE OF YOUR YOUR
ELECTRICITY REQUIREMENTS IN THE
EIGHT ZERO PLAN.
THERE ARE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
PLANS TO INCREASE ENERGY
EFFICIENCY IN THE CITY WHICH
WOULD REDUCE THE USE
OF ELECTRICITY AND ALSO TO
ELECTRIFY CERTAIN USES
TRANSPORTATION, BUILDING HEAT
AND SO ON WHICH WOULD TEND TO
INCREASE THE ELECTRICITY
REQUIREMENTS WE MODELED THE
PROJECTIONS BASED ON THAT OUT
TWENTY YEARS IN THE NEAR TERM
THOSE TWO EFFECTS THE
INCREASING EFFICIENCY AND
ELECTRIFICATION ESSENTIALLY
OFFSET EACH OTHER AND THEN AS
WE GET INTO THE TWENTY THIRTIES
THE ELECTRIFICATION KIND
OF TAKES OVER AND YOU SEE
SIGNIFICANT GROWTH IN THE
AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY THAT'S
REQUIRED IN THE CITY.
THERE'S A LOT OF DETAIL IN THAT
PROJECTION IN THE REPORT WHICH
I HOPE WILL BE USEFUL TO YOUR
STAFF AND THINKING ABOUT
SOME
OF THOSE PROGRAMS BUT WHERE OUR
ASSIGNMENT WAS TO LOOK AT HOW
WE COULD MAKE THAT ELECTRICITY
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE
BY 2030 AND PRESUMABLY
THEREAFTER JUST AS ROUND
NUMBERS IT'S ONE HUNDRED
MILLION MEGAWATT HOURS A YEAR.
A MEGAWATT HOUR IS A THOUSAND
KILOWATT HOURS AND KILOWATT
HOURS ARE THE UNITS OF MEASURE
ON YOUR ELECTRIC BILL TYPICALLY
COSTING 15 20 CENTS A KILOWATT
HOUR DEPENDING ON TIME OF DAY
AND WHAT TYPE OF CUSTOMER YOU
ARE.
AND SO ON.
SO THAT I SAID I'M GOING TO USE
THAT MEGAWATT HOUR REFERENCE
FROM TIME TO TIME AND I WANTED
TO MAKE SURE YOU HAD A
DEFINITION THE I'M NOT SHOWING
A GRAPH BUT IN ADDITION TO JUST
LOOKING AT THE AGGREGATE
AMOUNTS OF ELECTRICITY THAT
WOULD BE USED, WE NEED TO LOOK
AT THE CRIME PATTERN OF THAT
USE SO WE REALLY MODEL ALL
EIGHT THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED
AND SIXTY HOURS OF A TYPICAL
YEAR AND MODEL HOW THAT PATTERN
WOULD CHANGE AS A RESULT OF THE
EFFICIENCY AND ELECTRIFICATION
MEASURES AND JUST TO SIMPLIFY
TODAY HIGH USAGE OCCURS IN THE
SUMMER IN THE DAYTIME TYPICALLY
IN LATE AFTERNOON BECAUSE
OF AIR CONDITIONING LOADS IN AN
ELECTRIFIED FUTURE THE PEAKS
WILL BE IN THE WINTER IN COLD
DARK CONDITIONS SO PRETTY
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE IN WIND
POWER IS USED.
THAT'S IMPORTANT WHEN WE THINK
ABOUT THINGS LIKE SOLAR WHICH
ARE UNPRETTY, ACTIVE DURING
WHAT WILL BE THE WINTER PEAKS
BUT HIGHLY PRODUCTIVE DURING
WATER NOW SUMMER PEAKS.
SO WE'VE ACCOUNTED FOR THOSE
KINDS OF THINGS IN MODELING ON
THIS SLIDE WE HAVE TWO PIE
CHARTS.
THE ONE ON THE LEFT IS
ESSENTIALLY WHERE WE ARE IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND THE ONE
ON THE RIGHT IS WHERE WE WILL
BE IN TWENTY THIRTY UNDER
CERTAIN ASSUMPTIONS THOSE
ASSUMPTIONS ARE ESSENTIALLY
THAT THERE'S NOT ANY NEW
INITIATIVES BUT THAT BOTH DTT
AND THE CITY EXECUTE THE THINGS
THAT ARE CURRENTLY BEING DONE
BOTH VIGOROUSLY AND WELL
THROUGH THAT PERIOD TO 2030.
SO THIS IS SORT OF ROUGHLY THE
BEST CASE IF YOU DON'T DO
ANYTHING DIFFERENT AND IN PART
THIS IS INFORMED BY DTD
INTEGRATED RESOURCE PLAN WHICH
WAS CONSIDERED BY THE PUBLIC
SERVICE COMMISSION OVERLAPPING
WITH OUR WORK AND SETTLED IN
THAT SETTLEMENT.
THERE IS A COMMITMENT TO A
CERTAIN LEVELS OF RENEWABLES AS
A PART THEIR GENERAL POWER
SUPPLY.
THIS IS DISTINCT FROM THEIR
VOLUNTARY GREEN POWER PROGRAMS
JUST PART OF HOW THEY WILL
SUPPLY THE NEEDS OF THEIR
GENERIC CUSTOMERS THE GROWTH IN
THEIR RENEWABLES AS A RESULT
OF THAT SETTLEMENT IS PRETTY
SUBSTANTIAL.
IT'S NOT A GIVEN THAT THAT WILL
ALL BE ACCOMPLISHED OR THERE'S
SOME RISK THERE AS WELL AS RISK
THAT YOU KNOW, CITIZENS WITHIN
ANN ARBOR DON'T TAKE UP AS MUCH
SOLAR AS WE FORECAST AND SO ON.
SO I JUST WANTED TO STRESS THAT
THIS IS NOT A GIVEN IT'S A
REASONABLE FORECAST.
SO BY 20 30 IF THESE THINGS GO
AS I DESCRIBED EITHER DTV OR
RESIDENTS AND BUSINESSES WITHIN
ANN ARBOR OR THE CITIES
EXISTING INITIATIVES WOULD HAVE
ABOUT FIFTY NINE PERCENT
OF YOUR POWER CONSUMPTION BE
FROM RENEWABLES LEAVING A GAP
OF FORTY ONE PERCENT.
SO THAT'S THE BASIC NUMBER THAT
WE USED IN OUR VARIOUS ANALYZES
OF HOW MUCH INCREMENTAL
RENEWABLES NEEDED TO BE
ACCOMPLISHED.
REAL LIFE WILL NO DOUBT
INTERVENE AND IT'LL BE SOME NO
OTHER THAN THAT AND WE HAVE
THOUGHT ABOUT HOW TO BE
FLEXIBLE TO DEAL WITH WHATEVER
THAT REALITY TURNS OUT TO BE.
WE LOOKED AT A NUMBER OF ENERGY
OPTIONS BY ENERGY OPTIONS.
I MEAN SOURCES OF ELECTRICITY
THAT YOU COULD CLAIM CREDIT FOR
AS RENEWABLES SERVING THE
RESIDENTS OF BUSINESSES IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR WE EVALUATED
QUITE A NUMBER OF OPTIONS THAT
WE WOUND UP REJECTING IS JUST
UNACCEPTABLE OR IMPRACTICAL.
THE PRINCIPLE OPTIONS THAT WE
REVIEWED CAREFULLY AND
CONSIDERED IN PORTFOLIOS THAT
WE ANALYZED AND SO ON ARE THE
ONES SHOWN ON THE SLIDE.
AND I WANT TO DO A LITTLE BIT
OF DEFINITION THESE JUST SO
THAT WE COMMUNICATE CLEARLY AS
I GO ALONG LATER IN THE
PRESENTATION.
SO IN THE ELECTRIC UTILITY
BUSINESS GENERATION WHERE
STORAGE THAT IS ON THE CUSTOMER
SIDE OF THE METER IS REFERRED
TO AS BEHIND THE METER AND THAT
WHICH IS CONNECTED TO THE GRID
AND TYPICALLY EITHER OWNED BY
THE UTILITY OR UNDER A
CONTRACTOR THE UTILITY IS
REFERRED TO AS FRONT OF THE
METER AND I WILL USE THOSE
LABELS.
THERE ARE A FEW OTHER
TECHNOLOGIES THAT CAN BE DONE
BEHIND THE METER BUT
PRINCIPALLY IT WOULD BE SOLAR
AND THEN YOU CAN POTENTIALLY
COMBINE STORAGE WITH THAT.
SO THOSE ARE THE OPTIONS THAT
WE REALLY EXAMINED.
SO BEHIND THE METER SOLAR AND
BEHIND THE METER SOLAR WITH
STORAGE THERE'S A AN OPTION
CALLED COMMUNITY SOLAR IN
MICHIGAN WE DO NOT CURRENTLY
HAVE AN ENABLING LAW FOR WHAT
IS CONSIDERED TO BE TRUE
COMMUNITY SOLAR.
THE MICHIGAN UTILITIES OFFER
SOMETHING THAT THEY LABEL AS
COMMUNITY SOLAR.
THE DISTINCTION IS REALLY
OWNERSHIP.
SO THE WHAT MICHIGAN UTILITIES
OFFER IS COMMUNITY SOLAR IS
SOLAR OWNED BY THE UTILITIES
AND THEY SELL THE CUSTOMERS
SUBSCRIPTIONS TO THAT AS A WAY
OF GAINING ACCESS TO RENEWABLES
FOR YOUR OWN CONSUMPTION THAT
OFTEN IS JUST DONE AS A REGULAR
MONTHLY PAYMENT.
THERE ARE SOMETIMES OPTIONS TO
INVEST UP FRONT AND THEN
RECEIVE THE BENEFITS OVER TIME
BUT THAT IS REALLY A COMMUNITY
OR EXCUSE ME A UTILITY OFFERING
COMMUNITY SOLAR AS THIRD PARTY
OWNERSHIP OR COMMUNAL OWNERSHIP
BY THE SUBSCRIBERS IS NOT
CURRENTLY FEASIBLE.
THERE ARE LEGISLATE EFFORTS TO
ALLOW IT.
WE DID PROVIDE SOME ANALYSIS
OF WHAT THAT MIGHT LOOK LIKE
BUT I JUST WANT TO STRESS THAT
IT IS NOT SOMETHING YOU CAN GO
OUT AND DO TOMORROW.
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENTS IS
WHERE SOMEBODY PURCHASES THE
POWER FROM A FACILITY OWNED BY
SOMEBODY ELSE AND UTILITIES DO
THIS TO A DEGREE FROM TIME TO
TIME WE HAVE REQUIRED THEM TO
DO IT HERE IN MICHIGAN THEY
TEND TO PREFER TO ACTUALLY OWN
THE FACILITIES BUT A POWER
PURCHASE AGREEMENT IS AN OPTION
THAT WOULD BE AVAILABLE TO ANN
ARBOR EITHER AS A SUPPLEMENT TO
SERVICE FROM DTG IN WAYS THAT
I'LL GET TO IN A MOMENT OR AS A
POWER SUPPLY TO A MUNICIPAL
UTILITY POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENTS ARE TYPICALLY PRICED
SO MUCH PER MEGAWATT HOUR
OF PRODUCTION FROM SPECIFIED
FACILITIES AND THAT YOU WAS
PAID BASED ON DELIVERY.
AN IMPORTANT THING TO
UNDERSTAND THOUGH IS THAT THE
WAY THE US ELECTRIC UTILITY
SYSTEMS ARE STRUCTURED IF
SOMEONE HAS A GENERATOR OF ANY
KIND NOT JUST RENEWABLE THAT IS
CONNECTED TO THE TRANSMISSION
GRID IN ORDER TO PROVIDE POWER
TO SOMEBODY THAT IS REMOTE IN
MOST PARTS OF THE US AND
SPECIFICALLY IN THIS REGION,
YOU MUST SELL THAT POWER INTO A
WHOLESALE MARKET.
IT DOES IT IS NOT ACTUALLY SOLD
TO WHOMEVER HAS OWNERSHIP OR
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT
WHETHER THE POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENT IS A FINANCIAL
ARRANGEMENT OF SOME KIND ABOUT
WHO PAYS TO OPERATE THE
FACILITY AND THEN WHO GETS THE
REVENUE FROM BEING IT BEING
SOLD INTO THE WHOLESALE MARKET.
SO THERE ARE TWO VARIETIES
OF POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENTS
THAT WE ANALYZE.
ONE IS TRADITIONAL WHERE YOU
CAN ARBER ENTERED INTO A POWER
PURCHASE AGREEMENT, A
TRADITIONAL POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENT YOU WOULD COMMIT TO A
PRICE TO WHOMEVER OWNED THAT
FACILITY FOR EVERY BIT POWER
THEY PRODUCED THAT POWER WOULD
BE SOLD INTO THE WHOLESALE
MARKET AND YOU WOULD BE AT RISK
FOR THE DIFFERENCE WHICH COULD
BE GOOD OR BAD DEPENDING ON
WHAT THE DIFFERENCE IS.
THE VIRTUAL POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENT IS STRUCTURED
TYPICALLY DIFFERENTLY AND BEING
A MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT AND
PROBABLY NOT WANTING TO TAKE ON
A LOT OF MARKET RISK.
YOU WOULD TYPICALLY FRAME IT AS
A WE'LL PAY SO MUCH PER
MEGAWATT HOUR THAT IS PRODUCED
FROM THAT FACILITY YOU THE
OWNER OF THE FACILITY NEED TO
TAKE THE POWER TO MARKET, GET
WHAT YOU CAN AND IN COMBINATION
WITH OUR PAYMENTS THAT SHOULD
BE ENOUGH TO PAY FOR THE
FACILITY IN WHICH YOU'RE
PURCHASING THEN WE COMMONLY
REFERRED TO AS A RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDIT WHICH IS JUST A
QUANTITATIVE MEASURE.
IT'S A MEGAWATT HOUR
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY AND YOU AS
THE PURCHASER OF THAT RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDIT GET THE SOLE
RIGHT TO CLAIM THAT YOU ARE
SUPPLYING
THAT RENEWABLE
ENERGY.
OTHERWISE IT'S JUST GENERIC
POWER BEING SOLD INTO THE
WHOLESALE MARKET.
SO I DON'T WANT TO BELABOR THAT
BUT IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S JUST
REALLY IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND
AS YOU VENTURE INTO THIS POWER
PURCHASE AGREEMENT IS TO GET
RENEWABLE POWER FROM A SPECIFIC
FACILITY OR GROUP
OF FACILITIES.
THERE IS NOW A NATIONAL MARKET
AND A SET OF REGIONAL MARKETS
FOR GENERIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS WHERE THE SOURCE IS NOT
IDENTIFIED.
IT'S NOT THAT YOU ARE PAYING
FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDIT
FROM THAT SOLAR FARM.
YOU'RE JUST BUYING RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDITS THAT ARE FROM
SOMEWHERE THEY ARE PROVIDED TO
YOU BY A BROKER.
THE NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS ARE WE'LL GET TO IN A
MOMENT BUT YOU KNOW BECAUSE
THEY'RE NOT SPECIFIC TO SOURCE
YOU HAVE LESS CONTROL OVER WHAT
YOU MIGHT CONSIDER TO BE THE
QUALITY OF THOSE CREDITS.
BUT THEY ARE AVAILABLE THE SPOT
MARKET ON SHORT TERM PURCHASES
AND USUALLY AT AT LOWER PRICES
THAN RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS
THAT ARE FROM A SPECIFIC SOURCE
WITH QUALITIES THAT YOU WANT AS
THE BUYER.
AND SO THAT'S THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN BUYING EUREX THROUGH A
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT AND
THROUGH THE NATIONAL RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDIT MARKET.
I APOLOGIZE.
I SLIP INTO THE REC ACRONYM
FROM TIME TO TIME.
I WILL TRY NOT TO DO THAT.
WE EVALUATED A VIRTUAL POWER
REDUCTION AGREEMENT THIS IS A
DEVICE WHEREBY THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR MIGHT CHOOSE TO HELP
SOMEONE ELSE REDUCE THEIR
ENERGY CONSUMPTION OR USE
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTEAD OF IT
BEING DONE.
I WOULD SAY WITHIN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
SO HYPOTHETICALLY YOU COULD SAY
WE LIKE BEHIND THE METER
ROOFTOP SOLAR THERE'S ONLY SO
MUCH OF THAT AVAILABLE IN ANN
ARBOR BUT THERE'S A COMMUNITY
DOWN THE ROAD THAT WE COULD
SEND THE MONEY AND THEY COULD
DO MORE BEHIND THE METER SOLAR
IN THAT COMMUNITY OR HELP YOU
WITH ENERGY EFFICIENCY, THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO THAT IS THE NATURE OF A
POWER REDUCTION AGREEMENT AND
THE REDUCTION IS AN EMPHASIS ON
EFFICIENCY ASSISTANCE TO OTHERS
AND ITS MAIN VALUE
TRADITIONALLY NOT THAT IT'S ALL
THAT OLD IS TO HELP LOW INCOME
PEOPLE OUTSIDE OF THE COMMUNITY
AND THEN FINAL OPTION THAT WE
EVALUATE IT IS DTD VOLUNTARY
GREEN PRICING PROGRAM KNOWN AS
MY GREEN POWER.
THERE ARE SIGNIFICANT NUMBERS
OF PEOPLE IN ANN ARBOR WHO
CURRENTLY PARTICIPATE IN THAT
PROGRAM AND THE NATURE OF THAT
IS THERE'S A TARIFF THAT GUIDES
THE PRICING BUT BASICALLY YOU
SIGN UP FOR THE PROGRAM.
DTG COMMITS TO PRODUCING ENOUGH
RENEWABLE ENERGY TO MEET YOUR
DEMAND.
YOU PAY FOR THAT BASED ON THE
COST OF THE FACILITIES FROM
WHICH IT COMES AND THEN YOU GET
A CREDIT FROM THE BROWN POWER
OR GENERIC POWER THAT YOU WOULD
OTHERWISE USE THE AVOIDED COST
THAT IT HAS BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT
GETTING THAT POWER AND INSTEAD
ARE GETTING IT FROM THE
RENEWABLE FACILITY.
TYPICALLY THAT IS A COST TO YOU
AS THE CUSTOMER.
BUT THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS AS
THE PRICE OF GAS WENT UP AND
THE PRICE OF RENEWABLES
CONTINUE TO GO DOWN, IT'S
ACTUALLY BEEN A NET CREDIT TO
YOU AS A PARTICIPANT IN THE
VOLUNTARY GREEN PRICING PROGRAM
AND THAT OF COURSE HAS SPURRED
INCREASED PARTICIPATION.
SO THOSE ARE THE PRINCIPAL
ENERGY OPTIONS THAT WE
EVALUATED AND JUST BECAUSE I
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THINGS
ARE UNDERSTOOD.
IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT
THOSE RIGHT NOW, I SHOULD
ANSWER THEM.
OK, I WILL PUSH ON YOU I'M
SORRY CUSTOMER GO AHEAD.
THE ORIGINAL PRODUCTION
AGREEMENTS IS THAT SOMETHING
THAT MUNICIPALITIES COME IN
TOGETHER FOR?
SO SAY EXAMPLE, IF THIS WAS AT
A COUNTY LEVEL WITH MULTIPLE
MUNICIPALITIES COMING INTO IT
COULD BE BUT MORE COMMONLY IT'S
BEEN TARGETED TO EITHER
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS OR
PERHAPS NEIGHBORHOODS OR
THROUGH A UTILITY PROGRAM
PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO THEIR
LOW INCOME CUSTOMERS.
OK, OK SO REALLY SPECIFIC TO AN
AREA CALLED OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
VERSUS JOINT MUNICIPALITIES
COMING TOGETHER.
OK TYPICALLY BUT I DON'T WANT
TO THE PLAN OVERLY RESTRICTIVE
DEFINITION.
I ALSO SHOULD TELL YOU THAT
IT'S RELATIVELY HARD TO DO WELL
IN MICHIGAN UNDER MICHIGAN LAW
SO WE WE'RE NOT WINDING UP
RECOMMENDING IT TO YOU JUST
BECAUSE OF THE LEGAL
DIFFICULTIES OF DOING IT WELL
OK.
THANK YOU.
OK I'LL PUSH ON.
I'M NOT GOING TO GO THROUGH THE
THANK YOU.
LITTLE TABLE TO THE RIGHT BUT
I'M NOT GOING TO GO THROUGH THE
JUST TO ILLUSTRATE WE EVALUATED
LITTLE TABLE TO THE RIGHT BUT
EACH OF THOSE ENERGY OPTIONS ON
JUST TO ILLUSTRATE WE EVALUATED
EACH OF THE CRITERIA AND
EACH OF THOSE ENERGY OPTIONS ON
PRINCIPLES IN A TO ZERO HI PLAN
EACH OF THE CRITERIA AND
AND JUST TO SUMMARIZE THERE'S A
PRINCIPLES IN A TO ZERO HI PLAN
SOMETHING OF A TRADE OFF
AND JUST TO SUMMARIZE THERE'S A
OF SPEED VERSUS THE OTHER
SOMETHING OF A TRADE OFF
QUALITIES THAT YOU ARE LOOKING
OF SPEED VERSUS THE OTHER
FOR IN THESE OPTIONS.
QUALITIES THAT YOU ARE LOOKING
THE EASIEST THING TO DO OUT
FOR IN THESE OPTIONS.
OF ALL OF OUR LIST IS JUST TO
THE EASIEST THING TO DO OUT
GO BY NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY
OF ALL OF OUR LIST IS JUST TO
CREDITS ON THE SPOT MARKET THAT
GO BY NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY
CAN BE DONE QUITE QUICKLY THE
CREDITS ON THE SPOT MARKET THAT
MORE YOU GET TO THINGS THAT
CAN BE DONE QUITE QUICKLY THE
HAVE THAT ARE LOCALLY SOURCED
MORE YOU GET TO THINGS THAT
AND THINGS OF THAT KIND PROVIDE
HAVE THAT ARE LOCALLY SOURCED
RESILIENCE IN THE COMMUNITY,
AND THINGS OF THAT KIND PROVIDE
THE SLOWER IT'S GOING TO BE TO
RESILIENCE IN THE COMMUNITY,
ACQUIRE LARGE QUANTITIES
THE SLOWER IT'S GOING TO BE TO
OF RENEWABLES FROM THOSE
ACQUIRE LARGE QUANTITIES
SOURCES YOU CAN PUT A ROOFTOP
OF RENEWABLES FROM THOSE
SOLAR SYSTEM ON PRETTY QUICKLY
SOURCES YOU CAN PUT A ROOFTOP
ON AN INDIVIDUAL HOUSE OR
SOLAR SYSTEM ON PRETTY QUICKLY
BUILDING.
ON AN INDIVIDUAL HOUSE OR
SO PART IS GETTING THE LARGE
BUILDING.
NUMBER OF PEOPLE TO AGREE TO
SO PART IS GETTING THE LARGE
PARTICIPATE THAT YOU WOULD NEED
NUMBER OF PEOPLE TO AGREE TO
TO AMASS SIGNIFICANT QUANTITIES
PARTICIPATE THAT YOU WOULD NEED
.
TO AMASS SIGNIFICANT QUANTITIES
SO THAT'S KIND OF THE NATURE
.
OF THE TRADEOFF.
SO THAT'S KIND OF THE NATURE
WE CAN COME BACK TO ANY OF THAT
OF THE TRADEOFF.
THAT YOU WANT BUT IT'S SORT
WE CAN COME BACK TO ANY OF THAT
OF NOT CENTRAL TO THE NEXT FEW
THAT YOU WANT BUT IT'S SORT
POINTS THAT I NEED TO MAKE SO
OF NOT CENTRAL TO THE NEXT FEW
WE EVALUATED THE COSTS OF THESE
POINTS THAT I NEED TO MAKE SO
OPTIONS IN VARIOUS WAYS.
WE EVALUATED THE COSTS OF THESE
THIS PARTICULAR GRAPH HAS TO DO
OPTIONS IN VARIOUS WAYS.
WITH THE NET COST TO WHOMEVER
THIS PARTICULAR GRAPH HAS TO DO
IS DECIDING AND PAYING FOR THIS
WITH THE NET COST TO WHOMEVER
WHICH IS DIFFERENT THAN THE
IS DECIDING AND PAYING FOR THIS
COST TO SOCIETY IS DIFFERENT
WHICH IS DIFFERENT THAN THE
THAN THE COST TO THE CITY OF A
COST TO SOCIETY IS DIFFERENT
PROGRAM.
THAN THE COST TO THE CITY OF A
IT'S DIFFERENT THAN THE COST TO
PROGRAM.
THE UTILITY BUT IT'S VERY
IT'S DIFFERENT THAN THE COST TO
RELEVANT FOR THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
THE UTILITY BUT IT'S VERY
DECIDING WHAT TO DO.
RELEVANT FOR THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
AND SO THAT'S WHY I'M
DECIDING WHAT TO DO.
PRESENTING THIS THE OTHER FORMS
AND SO THAT'S WHY I'M
OF COST ARE ADDRESSED IN THE
PRESENTING THIS THE OTHER FORMS
REPORT IN THIS PARTICULAR
OF COST ARE ADDRESSED IN THE
DIAGRAM.
REPORT IN THIS PARTICULAR
TWENTY TWENTY THREE IS SHOWN IN
DIAGRAM.
THE SORT OF ORANGE COLOR AND
TWENTY TWENTY THREE IS SHOWN IN
TWENTY THIRTY IN GREEN AND THIS
THE SORT OF ORANGE COLOR AND
IS TO SHOW YOU THE TRENDS IN
TWENTY THIRTY IN GREEN AND THIS
THE COSTS OF THESE THINGS AND
IS TO SHOW YOU THE TRENDS IN
THEN THE RANGE IS JUST TYPICAL
THE COSTS OF THESE THINGS AND
RANGE OF UNCERTAINTY ABOUT
THEN THE RANGE IS JUST TYPICAL
COSTS PARTICULARLY AS VARIATION
RANGE OF UNCERTAINTY ABOUT
IN CIRCUMSTANCES AND THEN
COSTS PARTICULARLY AS VARIATION
OF COURSE PROJECTION
IN CIRCUMSTANCES AND THEN
UNCERTAINTY BEHIND THE METER.
OF COURSE PROJECTION
SOLAR IS A NET SAVINGS TO MOST
UNCERTAINTY BEHIND THE METER.
CUSTOMERS NOW THE COST OF SOLAR
SOLAR IS A NET SAVINGS TO MOST
HAS GOTTEN LOW ENOUGH AND THE
CUSTOMERS NOW THE COST OF SOLAR
COST OF GRID POWER HAS GOTTEN
HAS GOTTEN LOW ENOUGH AND THE
HIGH ENOUGH AT RETAIL THAT
COST OF GRID POWER HAS GOTTEN
THAT'S A BENEFICIAL COST SAVING
HIGH ENOUGH AT RETAIL THAT
OR BILL SAVING MEASURE.
THAT'S A BENEFICIAL COST SAVING
ALL OF THE OTHERS ARE A COST A
OR BILL SAVING MEASURE.
LITTLE BIT TO A LOT DEPENDING
ALL OF THE OTHERS ARE A COST A
ON THE DETAILS.
LITTLE BIT TO A LOT DEPENDING
SO THAT WOULD CLEARLY BE YOU AN
ON THE DETAILS.
OPTION TO PURSUE AND IT'S
SO THAT WOULD CLEARLY BE YOU AN
SOMETHING WHERE THE THE SITE
OPTION TO PURSUE AND IT'S
GOES TO WHOEVER THAT IS THAT
SOMETHING WHERE THE THE SITE
HAS THE SOLAR AND PAYS THE
GOES TO WHOEVER THAT IS THAT
ELECTRIC BILL WOULD HAVE A
HAS THE SOLAR AND PAYS THE
SAVINGS AS I GET TO A LITTLE
ELECTRIC BILL WOULD HAVE A
LATER UNFORTUNATELY THE
SAVINGS AS I GET TO A LITTLE
QUANTITY OF SUCH SOLAR THAT CAN
LATER UNFORTUNATELY THE
BE DONE WITHIN THE CITY IS
QUANTITY OF SUCH SOLAR THAT CAN
NOWHERE NEAR ENOUGH TO ACHIEVE
BE DONE WITHIN THE CITY IS
YOUR HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLES
NOWHERE NEAR ENOUGH TO ACHIEVE
.
YOUR HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLES
SO THIS IS SOMETHING YOU WANT
.
TO BE DOING BUT IT'S NOT
SO THIS IS SOMETHING YOU WANT
SOMETHING YOU WANT TO BE
TO BE DOING BUT IT'S NOT
RELYING ON FOR THE WHOLE
SOMETHING YOU WANT TO BE
HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE
RELYING ON FOR THE WHOLE
ENERGY ACHIEVEMENT ALSO SHOULD
HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE
NOTE THAT SOME OF THESE OPTIONS
ENERGY ACHIEVEMENT ALSO SHOULD
ARE AVAILABLE OR UNAVAILABLE
NOTE THAT SOME OF THESE OPTIONS
DEPENDING ON THE UTILITY
ARE AVAILABLE OR UNAVAILABLE
STRUCTURE YOU'RE IN SO
DEPENDING ON THE UTILITY
MUNICIPAL UTILITY CAN OPERATE
STRUCTURE YOU'RE IN SO
UNDER DIFFERENT RULES THAN DTC
MUNICIPAL UTILITY CAN OPERATE
CHOOSES TO OPERATE OR CAN
UNDER DIFFERENT RULES THAN DTC
OPERATE UNDER UNDER MICHIGAN
CHOOSES TO OPERATE OR CAN
REGULATIONS AND SO THERE'S A
OPERATE UNDER UNDER MICHIGAN
LITTLE BIT OF SHAPING OF THOSE
REGULATIONS AND SO THERE'S A
OPTIONS BASED ON THE UTILITY
LITTLE BIT OF SHAPING OF THOSE
STRUCTURE THAT YOU LIKE YOU
OPTIONS BASED ON THE UTILITY
PURSUE
FOR EACH OF THE
SCENARIOS THAT WE EVALUATED WE
DEVELOPED A PATH WHAT IT WOULD
LOOK LIKE TO GET TO THE TWO
PERCENT RENEWABLES.
THESE ARE NOT YOU KNOW, THE
ONLY PATHS THEY'RE SORT
OF REASONABLE EXPECTATION ABOUT
WHAT COULD ACCOMPLISH.
THE ONE THAT I'M SHOWING YOU
RIGHT NOW IS BASED ON DTT AND
THEN THE CITY TAKING ON
ADDITIONAL STEPS TO FILL IN
THAT GAP MOSTLY BY ACQUIRING
RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS FROM
EITHER THE NATIONAL MARKET OR
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENTS.
BUT THERE
ARE ELEMENTS HERE
OF UPTAKE OF BEHIND THE METER
SOLAR JUST PRIVATELY ON A
VOLUNTARY BASIS BY PEOPLE IN
THE COMMUNITY AND OF DOING SOME
OF IT THROUGH THE SOLAR
ORGANIZATION PROGRAM THAT YOU
CURRENTLY OFFER.
THERE ALSO IS A PROJECTED
INCREASE IN THE UPTAKE OF THE
VOLUNTARY GREEN PRICING AND SO
ON.
OTHER SCENARIOS FOR OTHER
CIRCUMSTANCES LOOK DIFFERENT.
TO ILLUSTRATE THAT IN A MOMENT
HERE ARE THREE OF THOSE
SCENARIOS FOR COMPARISON AND
THESE ARE ON THE LEFT NUMBERS
COLUMN.
THIS SCENARIO THAT I WAS JUST
SHOWING YOU OF SERVICE COMING
FROM DTG AT THE CITY TAKING
STEPS TO ACQUIRE RENEWABLE
CREDITS TO COMPLETE A
PORTFOLIO.
THE MIDDLE COLUMN IS PURSUING
THE SUPPLEMENTAL ENERGY UTILITY
OR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY
THAT I KNOW YOU'VE ALL HEARD
ABOUT THAT LEADS TO GREATER
ADOPTION OF SOLAR AND A LESSER
NEED FOR THE OTHER KINDS
OF MEASURES.
AND THEN THE THIRD ONE IS WELL
WHAT IF YOU COULD DO COMMUNITY
SOLAR AS WL?
AND SO THAT COMES TO IT.
SO THIS ILLUSTRATES THE KIND
OF VARIATION IN YOUR PORTFOLIO
THAT YOU GET BASED ON THE
PROGRAM OFFERINGS, UTILITY
STRUCTURES THAT YOU CHOOSE THE
COST TO THE CITY FOR THOSE
THREE SCENARIOS ARE SHOWN IN
THIS SLIDE AND THESE ARE
PRODUCTIONS SO TAKE THEM FOR
WHAT THEY ARE WORTH.
WE THINK WE DID THEM PRETTY
WELL BUT THE FUTURE IS ALWAYS
UNCERTAIN.
THE TOP BLOCK OF THREE ROWS IS
OUR PROJECTION OF WHAT THE COST
WOULD BE IN 2030.
THE LOWER LOCK IS PROJECTION
OF CUMULATIVE COSTS GETTING A
TWENTY THIRTY I'LL TALK MORE
ABOUT THE SCHEDULE THE GOING TO
THE PREVIOUS SLIDE WELL I GUESS
I WON'T GO YOU KNOW WE SHOULD
RAMP'S BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO YOU
CAN'T JUST TURN IT ALL ON IN
TWENTY THIRTY YOU'VE GOT TO GET
THERE SO THERE'D BE SOME COSTS
GETTING UP TO TWENTY THIRTY
TOTAL COSTS DURING THE FIRST
ROW OF EACH OF THOSE BLOCKS AND
THEN WE HAVE TWO CATEGORIES
RECOVERABLE AND NON-RECOVERABLE
SO BY RECOVERABLE WHAT WE MEAN
IS IF YOU CREATE A SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY UTILITY YOU INVEST IN
SOLAR SYSTEMS ON ROOFS, PEOPLE
IN THE COMMUNITY AND THEN YOU
CHARGE THEM FOR THE POWER THAT
COMES OUT OF THOSE SYSTEMS THAT
IS THAT COST THAT THEY PAY FOR
IS RECOVERABLE AND IT MAY BE AN
INVESTMENT.
SO THERE YOU KNOW, THERE'S A
CASH FLOW ISSUE DIFFERENT THAN
THIS BUT ULTIMATELY THE
CUSTOMER IS PAYING FOR THAT
SYSTEM.
ON THE OTHER HAND, IF YOU GO
OUT AND BUY RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS ON THE NATIONAL MARKET,
THE CITY WILL PAY THAT IT COMES
OUT OF THE CITIES BUDGET AND
THERE'S NOBODY TO GO GET IT
FROM OTHER THAN THE FUND
SOURCES FOR THE CITY BUDGET.
SO THAT'S THE DISTINCTION
BETWEEN RECOVERABLE AND
NON-RECOVERABLE THAT WE ARE
USING AND SHOWING IN THE REPORT
THE DIFFERENT OPTIONS AT THE
ENERGY OPTION LEVEL AND THEN IN
THE SCENARIOS JUST PLAY
DIFFERENTLY AND WHO'S
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COSTS AND
THOSE ARE CHOICES THAT YOU'LL
NEED TO MAKE.
WE CONSIDERED UTILITY STRUCTURE
OPTIONS PRINCIPALLY THESE
THREE.
SO THERE'S DTT YOU JUST
CONTINUE TO TAKE SERVICE FROM
DTV AND THEN YOU WORRY ABOUT
HOW TO GET MORE RENEWABLES IN
THE WORLD SEPARATELY THERE'S A
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY
WHICH IS SUPPLEMENTAL TO DTT SO
PRESUMPTIVELY EVERY CUSTOMER IS
STILL SERVED BY DTG FOR SOME
OF THEIR POWER EVEN IF THEY'RE
NET ZERO ON THE YEAR THERE'S A
BACK AND FORTH FLOW EVERYBODY'S
CONNECTED TO TI.
EVERYBODY GETS A BILL BUT YOU
PROVIDE A WAY FOR BETTER ACCESS
TO SOLAR OR SOLAR PLUS STORAGE
THROUGH SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY AND THEN FINALLY
THERE'S THE MUNICIPAL IZATION
OPTION WHERE ANN ARBOR TAKES
OVER TAKES POSSESSION OF DTRS
ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION ASSETS
WITHIN THE CITY AND STANDS UP A
UTILITY AND MUNICIPAL UTILITY
WHICH BECOMES THE LOAD SERVING
ENTITY THAT IS OBLIGATED TO
PROVIDE POWER AS NEEDED TO THE
CUSTOMERS AND BUILDS THEM FOR
THAT JUST AS YOU OPERATE YOUR
WATER UTILITY NOW
SO WE HAVE
PREVITE OR WILL PROVIDE WILL
TRANSFER OVER TO YOUR STAFF A
FINANCIAL MODEL FOR THE
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY AND
IT HAS LOTS OF KNOBS AND LEVERS
IF YOU WILL FOR DECISIONS ABOUT
HOW YOU MIGHT OPERATE SUCH A
UTILITY.
THIS TABLE IS JUST TO SHOW YOU
SOME REPRESENTATIVE RESULTS FOR
A COUPLE OF PLAUSIBLE OPTIONS
AND FOR DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF UPTAKE AND SO THIS IS
PROGRESSIVE THE LEFTMOST COLUMN
BEING WHAT YOU WOULD ACCOMPLISH
IN THE PERIOD SAY FROM AN HOUR
TO TO TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN THE
SECOND IS TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN
TO TWENTY THIRTY AND THEN THE
THIRD COLUMN IS A DIFFERENT
FINANCING OPTION AND BEGINNING
IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE BUT AT A
LARGER SCALE IN THE FIRST TWO
COLUMNS ARE ESSENTIALLY CITY
DEBT COULD BE GENERAL
OBLIGATION OR REVENUE BONDS BUT
YOU'RE PUTTING UP THE MONEY UP
FRONT AND THEN HAVING TO YOU TO
MAKE IT BACK AS A TYPICAL
UTILITY OPERATION A THIRD
COLUMN ALLOWS FOR THE
POSSIBILITY THAT YOU COULD SEEK
A PARTNER SOMEBODY WHO WOULD
INSTALL AND OWN SOLAR SYSTEMS
BUT WOULD BILL YOU FOR THEM AND
THEN YOU WOULD BE BILLING THE
CUSTOMERS.
SO IT'S ESSENTIALLY A PASS
THROUGH A POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENT OR SOLAR LEASE FROM A
THIRD PARTY WHO WOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CAPITAL AND
YOU WOULD NOT BE PUTTING DEBT
IN PLACE.
BUT OF COURSE YOUR COSTS
OF CAPITAL ARE TYPICALLY LESS
THAN SOMEBODY WHO IS DOING SOME
EQUITY INVESTMENT IN AN
ARRANGEMENT LIKE WHAT I
DESCRIBED.
SO THESE ARE REPRESENTATIVE
RESULTS.
THIS IS THIS IS ALL BASED ON A
COUPLE OF KEY ASSUMPTIONS.
ONE IS THAT YOU NEED TO CHARGE
A LOW ENOUGH RATE TO BE
COMPETITIVE WITH JUST
INDEPENDENT PROVIDERS OF SOLAR
,ROOFTOP SOLAR AND THE OTHER
IS THAT IT MUST PAY FOR ITSELF
THROUGH THESE RATES.
IT IS FEASIBLE TO DO THAT IN
OUR VIEW WITH EITHER OF THESE
FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS OR SOME
OTHERS THAT ARE POSSIBLE WITHIN
THE MODEL.
THE OTHER THING WOULD DRAW TO
YOUR ATTENTION IS IF YOU LOOK
AT THE LAST THREE ROWS THE THE
TOP THE THREE IS WHAT THE RATE
PER KILOWATT HOUR WOULD NEED TO
BE FOR IF IF THE OFFERING IS
JUST ROOFTOP SOLAR.
THE SECOND LINE IS WHAT IF YOU
ADD STORAGE TO WHAT IS
INSTALLED AT PEOPLE IN PEOPLE'S
BUILDINGS AND NOW YOU CHARGE
THEM FOR THAT THE COST OF THAT
STORAGE A KILOWATT HOUR BASIS
AND YOU'LL SEE IT PRODUCES
PRETTY HIGH RATES.
THE OPPORTUNITY TO ARBITRAGE
WHEN YOU USE POWER WITH THAT
STORAGE IS NOT GREAT ENOUGH TO
REALLY MAKE THE STORAGE PAY.
WE DID INCLUDE THAT IN THE
MODELING AND SO THE PRINCIPLE
VALUE FOR STORAGE CURRENTLY IN
SOMETHING LIKE A RESIDENTIAL
APPLICATION IS IT'S RESILIENCE
VALUE AND THE TYPICAL MARKET
OFFER IS A MONTHLY CHARGE FOR
THAT BATTERY.
SO IF YOU WANTED TO DO IT WHAT
WE WOULD TYPICALLY RECOMMEND
WOULD BE TO CHARGE FOR THE
POWER AS THOUGH IT WERE SOLAR
ONLY AND THEN HAVE AN EXTRA
CHARGE FIXED MONTHLY CHARGE TO
PAY FOR THE BATTERY.
SO THOSE ARE REPRESENTATIVE
RESULTS.
THERE ARE LOTS OF DECISIONS TO
BE MADE ABOUT HOW YOU SET UP AN
SITU, HOW YOU FINANCE IT AND SO
ON AND WE ARE PROVIDING A MODEL
WHERE THOSE CAN BE EVALUATED IN
DETAIL AND THEN PROJECTED BASED
ON THE CHOICES THAT YOU MAKE.
I MEAN NOW TURN TO THE
MUTUALIZATION.
SO RIGHT NOW THIS THESE ARE
LABELED LOW END ESTIMATES AND
HIGH END ESTIMATES.
I WANT TO CLARIFY A LITTLE BIT
MORE PROPERLY BE LOWER AND
HIGHER ESTIMATES.
THERE'S A GOOD DEAL
OF UNCERTAINTY.
ELABORATE ON THAT AT THE MOMENT
ABOUT THE TERMS UNDER WHICH YOU
MIGHT ACQUIRE ASSETS FROM DTI
AND THERE'S UNCERTAINTY ABOUT
OTHER ASPECTS OF THIS AS WELL.
SO THESE ARE AND THESE ARE
BASED ON A SAMPLING OF THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM IN ANN
ARBOR, NOT A COMPREHENSIVE
INVENTORY.
SECOND POINT IS THAT THESE ARE
ESSENTIALLY CURRENT COSTS.
THEY'RE BASED ON WHAT IT WOULD
BE IF YOU DID IT NEXT YEAR
BASED ON CURRENT CONDITIONS
OF THE GRID IN ANN ARBOR AS
WE'LL DISCUSS THE TIMELINE FOR
CREATING A MUNICIPAL UTILITY IS
LIKELY TO BE FAIRLY
LONG.
SO ANY NUMBERS PRODUCED NOW
WILL INEVITABLY BE OUTDATED AND
WRONG AT THE TIME SUCH A
TRANSACTION HAPPENED, THE
CREDIT THAT'S THERE NOW WILL
AGE AND SOME OF IT WOULD BE
WORTH LESS.
SOME IT WILL BE REPLACED.
DTC MAY UNDERTAKE IMPROVEMENTS
SO THE ASSETS THAT WOULD BE IN
THE CITY IN THAT HYPOTHETICAL
DATE WHERE YOU ACHIEVE
RENATIONALIZATION WILL SIMPLY
BE DIFFERENT THAN WHAT IS
PRESENTED HERE.
IN ADDITION TO THAT BECAUSE
THIS IS A SAMPLING.
YOU KNOW THERE'S A LITTLE BIT
OF MAYBE A LOT OF UNCERTAINTY
AROUND THAT BUT THE CRITICAL
UNCERTAINTY IS WHAT IS THE
APPLICABLE STANDARD LEGAL
STANDARD FOR HOW MUCH YOU HAVE
TO PAY TO TAKE THOSE ASSETS AND
STAND UP YOUR OWN UTILITY?
THERE'S VERY LITTLE PRECEDENT.
THERE'S ONE CASE IN MICHIGAN
THE CITY OF ALMA THOUGHT ABOUT
DOING THIS SEVERAL DECADES AGO
NOW AND THERE WAS A DECISION BY
THE FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY
COMMISSION.
BUT IT'S ONE THAT WAS
INCOMPLETELY SPECIFIED BECAUSE
ALL ULTIMATELY GAVE UP AND THEY
DIDN'T CARRY IT THROUGH.
ALL OF THE QUESTIONS WERE NOT
ANSWERED.
THE WHAT WE LABELED HERE IS THE
LOW END AND HIGH END ESTIMATES
REPRESENT THE BRACKETS
ESSENTIALLY OF WHAT THE
POSSIBLE INTERPRETATION IS ARE
OF THE ULTIMATE DECISION WITH
THE LOW AND BEING YOU KNOW, THE
INTERPRETATION THAT WE THINK
IT'S PLAUSIBLE THAT IS WHAT
WOULD BE MOST FAVORABLE TO YOU
AND THE HIGH END BEING THE
INTERPRETATION THAT IS
PLAUSIBLE THAT WOULD BE LEAST
FAVORABLE TO YOU.
SO THAT'S WHAT THESE NUMBERS
REPRESENT.
FINAL POINT ABOUT THIS.
THIS IS TAKING OVER THE SYSTEM
REPLACING STUFF WHEN IT NEEDS
TO BE REPLACED, TURNING THE
TREES, ET CETERA, BUT IT IS NOT
MAKING BIG STRUCTURAL CHANGES
TO IMPROVE RELIABILITY.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF YOU THOUGHT
WELL, WE SHOULD UNDERGROUND
CERTAIN PARTS OF THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, THERE'S NO
COST INCLUDED FOR THAT IN THESE
NUMBERS.
SO YOU MIGHT SAY WELL WE'LL DO
A BETTER JOB THAN DTT AND YOU
GET MARGINAL IMPROVEMENTS IN
RELIABILITY FROM THAT.
AND RESILIENCE BUT YOU DON'T
GET BIG IMPROVEMENTS WITHOUT
DOING SOMETHING BIGGER TO A
SYSTEM.
SO I JUST WANT THAT TO BE
REALLY CLEAR.
BUT THIS IS WHAT WOULD BE
REQUIRED TO START.
AND AS YOU CAN SEE ON THE
BOTTOM LINE WE'RE SAYING THAT
IF YOU COULD DO THIS IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR YEAR ONE IT'S
POSSIBLE THAT YOU WOULD BE ABLE
TO GET A NET SAVINGS COMPARED
TO SERVICE FROM IT'S ALSO
POSSIBLE IT COULD BE A GOOD
DEAL MORE EXPENSIVE THAN TAKING
SERVICE FROM DETI TO PRIMARILY
DEPENDENT ON THE LEGAL QUESTION
OF WHAT IS THE RULE FOR HOW
MUCH YOU HAVE TO PAY THE NEXT
SLIDE FOR CASH OUT FORWARD 20
YEARS WHEN YOU WILL HAVE
AMORTIZED THE DEBT THAT WAS
REQUIRED TO TAKE OVER THOSE
ASSETS FROM DETI AND REPLACE
SOME OF THE ASSETS YOURSELF AND
SORT OF INTO GOING CONCERN IN
HERE YOU CAN SEE IT GETS MORE
FAVORABLE.
BUT AGAIN THIS IS WITHOUT THOSE
IMPROVEMENTS IN SERVICE THAT WE
HEARD EARLIER, YOUR CITIZENS
WANT
WE EVALUATED THESE
STRUCTURAL OPTIONS ON MUCH,
MUCH THE SAME WAY USING THE
SAME CRITERIA AS WE DID THE
ENERGY OPTIONS.
I WANT TO SPEAK A LITTLE BIT
FOR CLARITY TO THE STRUCTURAL
OPTIONS VERSUS STRUCTURAL
SCENARIOS SO WE TRIED AN
EVALUATION HERE OF THE SEIU,
FOR EXAMPLE.
THAT'S JUST FOR THE CEO.
BUT YOU WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO
ACHIEVE 100 PERCENT RENEWABLES
WITH JUST THE SEIU.
OF COURSE IT STANDS BESIDE DDE.
SO YOUR OVERALL SCENARIO WOULD
BE A BLEND OF THOSE TWO AND WE
WE DID ANALYZE THAT AND THERE'S
SOME DISCUSSION IN THE REPORT
BUT IT WAS CLEAREST TO DESCRIBE
THE INDIVIDUAL OPTIONS HERE
AGAINST YOUR CRITERIA
.
KEY THING HERE IS REALLY THAT
WE WOULD SEE A PLAUSIBLE PATH
BY WHICH YOU ACHIEVE A
MUNICIPAL UTILITY BY 2030 IN
ORDER TO EMBED YOUR
ACCOMPLISHMENT OF 100 PERCENT
RENEWABLES IN THE MUNICIPAL
UTILITY IT WOULD TAKE SEVERAL
YEARS OF LITIGATION, A COUPLE
OF FOUR TO THREE YEARS TO STAND
UP YOUR MUNICIPAL UTILITY AND
THEN IF YOU WERE GOING TO
ACQUIRE RENEWABLES IN THAT
CONTEXT A FEW MORE YEARS FOR
THAT IT'S WELL BEYOND 2030 IF
YOU DECIDE TO GO THE MUNICIPAL
ZATION ROUTE YOU CAN HOWEVER
PREPARE FOR THAT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, IF YOU ENTER A
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT YOU
CAN WRITE THE TERMS OF THAT SO
THAT IF AND WHEN YOU CREATE A
MUNICIPAL UTILITY YOU THE CITY
AS THE TAKER OF THE POWER
PURCHASE AGREEMENT HAVE THE
RIGHT TO TRANSFER THAT TO YOUR
MUNICIPAL TILDY SO YOU JUST
NEED TO BE PREPARING ALONG THE
WAY FOR THAT TRANSITION.
SO OUR ONE OF OUR
RECOMMENDATIONS TO YOU REALLY
IS AT LEAST PARTLY DECOUPLE
THESE IDEAS IF YOU WANTED TO
ACHIEVE 100 PERCENT RENEWABLES
BY 2030, YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO DO SOME COMBINATION OF THE
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY AND
SUPPLEMENTS TO WHAT YOU GET
FROM DTG IF YOU WANT TO GO DOWN
THE MUNICIPAL ROUTE YOU WILL BE
ABLE TO TRANSITION TO 100
PERCENT RENEWABLES IN THAT
CONTEXT BUT YOU'RE NOT GOING TO
NOT LIKELY BE ABLE TO DO IT BY
2030.
YOU'RE UNLIKELY TO BE ABLE TO
DO IT BY 2030.
SO THAT'S THE DECISION
FRAMEWORK YOU SHOULD KEEP IN
MIND A KEY POINT THAT YOU'LL
WANT TO UNDERSTAND IF YOU START
TO GO DOWN THAT PATH IS WITH
THE SUPPLEMENTAL ENERGY UTILITY
PRIMARY SERVICE FROM DTD TO IS
CONSIDERED THE LOAD SERVING
ENTITY IN THE WAY THAT ELECTRIC
POWER SYSTEM IS REGULATED AND
THAT AS A LOAD SERVING ENTITY
THAT MAKES THEM RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE COSTS OF TRANSMISSION
OF POWER TO THE CUSTOMERS NOT
JUST THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
BUT THE LONG DISTANCE
TRANSMISSION AND THEY'RE
RESPONSIBLE FOR MEETING WHAT WE
REFER TO AS RESOURCE ADEQUACY,
MAKING SURE THERE'S ENOUGH
SUPPLY OF POWER OUT THERE TO
MEET THE DEMANDS OF CUSTOMERS
AT ALL TIMES, PARTICULARLY AT
THE PEAK TIMES AND WE REFER TO
THAT AS CAPACITY OR RESOURCE
ADEQUACY WITH A SUPPLEMENTING
DTI WITH RENEWABLE SOURCES WITH
THE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY
YOU DO NOT INCUR THOSE
OBLIGATIONS IF YOU BECOME A
MUNICIPAL UTILITY YOU DO AND
THEN YOU HAVE TO MEET
REQUIREMENTS FOR CAPACITY AT
EVERY HOUR OF THE YEAR AND SO
ON AND THAT TRIGGERS NOT
NECESSARILY GREATER COSTS THEN
IT COSTS TO PAY TO DO THOSE
THINGS BUT A WHOLE SET
OF OBLIGATIONS THAT YOU HAVE TO
MANAGE AS A UTILITY THAT YOU
WOULDN'T BE MANAGING BEFORE
THAT.
THAT'S WHY IT TAKES A LITTLE
TIME TO SET UP THAT UTILITY AND
GET IT OPERATING BECAUSE IT HAS
TO WORK WITH A LOT
OF REGULATORS TO BE ABLE TO
OPERATE IN THAT WAY.
SO SUMMARIZE OUR
RECOMMENDATIONS.
YOU SHOULD PLAN ON FULFILLING
YOUR HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE
ELECTRICITY GOAL BY TOPPING OFF
WITH THE NATIONAL RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDITS WHATEVER YOU
NEED TO ACHIEVE 100 PERCENT
UNDERNEATH THAT OVER TIME YOU
CAN BUILD UP HIGHER QUALITY
SOURCES OF RENEWABLES EITHER
THROUGH THE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY SUPPLEMENTS TO DTT OR
TRANSITIONING THAT YOU KNOW TO
MUNICIPAL UTILITY LATER IN THE
CONTEXT OF DOING THAT IT LOOKS
TO US LIKE THE SEIU IS WORTH
PURSUING AND WE PARTICULARLY
FOR ITS ABILITY TO ACCELERATE
SOLAR DEVELOPMENT AND PROVIDE
RESILIENT SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS
WITHIN THE CITY.
AND SO WE RECOMMEND THAT YOU
EXAMINE CONSIDER TAKING THAT
FURTHER IN ORDER TO MEET YOUR
100 PERCENT RENEWABLES WITH
HIGH QUALITY RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS TO MEET A LOT OF YOUR
CRITERIA AS OPPOSED TO THESE
GENERIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS THAT YOU CAN BUY ON THE
SPOT MARKET FROM UNKNOWN
SOURCES YOU WOULD NEED TO ISSUE
A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS AND IN
PARTICULAR IF IT'S GOING TO BE
ADDITIONAL RENEWABLES TO WHAT
WOULD OTHERWISE EXIST THAT HAS
LEAD TIME.
SO YOU WOULD PROBABLY WANT TO
BEGIN THAT PROCESS ALMOST
IMMEDIATELY IN ORDER TO HAVE
SOME OF THOSE AVAILABLE TO YOU
BY 2030.
OF COURSE YOU COULD RELY
HEAVILY ON NATIONAL MARKET
RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS IN
2030 AND BUILD UP YOUR SUPPLIER
QUALITY CREDITS LATER IF THAT'S
WHAT YOU NEED TO DO TO MANAGE
THE OVERALL PROCESS.
BUT THAT THAT APPROACH
OF GETTING STARTED IN TRYING TO
GET SOME OF IT IN PLACE IN 2030
IS SCORED BETTER ON YOUR RUBRIC
THAN JUST GOING AFTER THE
NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS.
AND THEN FINALLY THE POINT I
JUST MADE YOU JUST REALLY NEED
TO DECOUPLE MAKING 100
PERCENT
GOAL FROM ESTABLISHING THE
MUNICIPAL UTILITY IF YOU CHOOSE
TO GO THAT DIRECTION BECAUSE
YOU SIMPLY CAN'T GET THERE WITH
MUNICIPAL UTILITY AS THE
VEHICLE YOU'RE GOING TO NEED TO
DO IT ABSENT A MUNICIPAL
UTILITY AND THEN IF YOU GO
THERE TO TRANSITION TO IT LATER
AND THOSE NEXT STEPS ARE
SUMMARIZED HERE I DON'T REALLY
NEED TO GO THROUGH THEM BUT
BASICALLY IF EACH OF THESE
PATHS THERE'S AN OBVIOUS NEXT
STEP TO TAKE WITHOUT, I'D BE
HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
IN AN ALTERNATE BACK TO MRS.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
ARE THERE OTHER QUESTIONS FROM
COUNCIL MEMBERS YET?
COUNCIL MCCONNELL I'M PRETTY
SURE I KNOW THE ANSWER TO THIS
QUESTION BUT I WANT TO ASK IT
ANYWAY.
WHEN YOU LOOKED AT THE COST
OF MUNICIPAL IZATION YOU DID
NOT FACTOR IN THE COST THAT
WOULD BE YOU DIDN'T PROJECT ANY
COSTS REGARDING LITIGATION AND
I WAS HAVING TO GO THROUGH THAT
PROCESS IS A DELAY WOULD COST.
THAT'S CORRECT.
THANK YOU.
COUNCILMAN MODISH, I HAVE A
QUESTION JUST ABOUT WORDING AND
THEN I HAD A COUPLE OF OTHER
QUESTIONS THAT I'LL PICK UP
AFTER THAT.
BUT SO WOULD YOU PUT IT THIS
WAY OR AM I AM I UNDERSTAND YOU
CORRECTLY THAT WE SHOULDN'T
RULE OUT MUNICIPAL CAUSATION
SIMPLY BECAUSE IT CANNOT ENABLE
US TO ACHIEVE 100 PERCENT
RENEWABLE BY 2030.
WE SHOULD CONSIDER WHAT WE
MIGHT GET FROM IT AND CONSIDER
PURSUING IT FOR THE BENEFITS
THAT IT CAN PROVIDE US BUT NOT
BUT KNOWING THAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO GET TO 100 PERCENT
RENEWABLE BY 2030 THROUGH OTHER
MEANS.
I AGREE AND THAT IS AN ACCURATE
RESTATEMENT OF OUR
RECOMMENDATION.
OK THEN I I WAS CURIOUS WHY DO
THE VIRTUAL POWER AGREEMENTS
POOR FIRST SPEED AND WELL SPEED
I GUESS BECAUSE THERE JUST ARE
YOU WERE SAYING IT'S HARDER TO
GET ENOUGH PEOPLE ORGANIZED AND
THEN FAIR FOR SCALABILITY IS
THAT THE SAME ISSUE THAT YEAH
UM THE SPEED PART OF IT IS
SIMPLY THAT IF YOU WANT POWER
PURCHASE AGREEMENT IN MICHIGAN
OR NEAR MICHIGAN THERE'S NOT AN
AMPLE SUPPLY OF THEM NOW.
SO YOU WOULD PROBABLY BE
CONTRACTING WITH SOMEBODY WHO
IS PREPARED TO BUILD ONE BUT
HASN'T DONE SO AND FOR THEM TO
GET THROUGH THE WHOLE PROCESS
WOULD TAKE THREE OR FOUR YEARS
.
SO SPEED IS JUST SLOW BECAUSE
IT'S A LEGAL PROCESS TO GET
INTO THE CONTRACTS AND FOR THEM
TO GET INTERCONNECTION RIGHTS
TO THE TRANSMISSION SYSTEM AND
ALL OF THAT AND THEN ACTUALLY
BUILD IT UNDER YOUR CRITERIA
FOR SCALABILITY AND IT WAS
COUPLED WITH TRANSFERABILITY
AND IT IS REALLY ABOUT THE
ABILITY OF COMMUNITIES OTHER
THAN ANN ARBOR TO PURSUE THE
SAME PATH AND NOT EVERYONE HAS
AN ARBOR'S KIND VILLAGE AND AND
OTHER TOOLS TO BE ABLE TO DO IT
.
AND SO THAT'S THE SCALABILITY
THAT WE WERE BASING THAT
REINKING ON THAT FEELS A LITTLE
SECONDARY TO ME.
I KNOW WE LIKE TO SHOW A PATH
FOR OTHERS THAT THAT IS LESS
IMPORTANT TO ME THAN THE OTHER
ISSUE BECAUSE I'M PERSONALLY
REALLY NOT VERY I WOULD NEED TO
LEARN A LOT MORE AND BE REALLY
REASSURED ABOUT THE NATIONAL
REGS BECAUSE I'VE JUST THE
RESEARCH I'VE DONE IS
TERRIFYING.
SO SO AND THEN A THIRD ISSUE
JUST CONNECTING TO THE GREAT
PRESENTATION WE HAD ABOUT THE
PUBLIC SURVEY I'M NOT SURE IF
YOU CAN ANSWER THIS QUESTION.
I WASN'T QUITE ABLE TO PIECE
TOGETHER FROM THE REPORT BUT UM
I'M CONCERNED ABOUT RESIDENTS
SEEING INCREASES BOTH AS
RATEPAYERS AND AS TAXPAYERS AND
I WONDERED IF YOU COULD
IDENTIFY WHICH ROUTES ARE
CHOICES THAT WE WOULD MAKE THAT
WOULD THAT THEY WOULD SEE BOTH
INCREASES CERTAINLY UNDER THE
MUNICIPAL ZATION OPTION.
UM, ALL OF THE COSTS CAN BE IF
YOU WISH LOADED INTO THE RATES
THAT ARE CHARGED TO CUSTOMERS
OF THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY UNDER
THE OTHER STRUCTURES.
IT DEPENDS ON WHICH OF THE
OPTIONS YOU ARE LOOKING AT
GENERALLY SPEAKING BEHIND THE
METER RESOURCES YOU CAN
POTENTIALLY HAVE THE THE
CUSTOMERS PAY FOR IT AS WE
SHOWED, WE THINK THAT AT LEAST
THE SOLAR ONLY VERSION IS A
BILL SAVINGS TO THEM
.
THERE REALLY AREN'T A LOT
OF OTHER OPTIONS EXCEPT
COMMUNITY SOLAR WHERE THE
CUSTOMERS PAY FOR THE COST AND
THE CITIZENS NOT COMMUNITY
SOLAR BECOMES FEASIBLE ONLY IF
SOMETHING HAPPENS IN THE LEGAL
CONSTRUCT AND SO WHEN YOU
EMPHASIZE THAT BUT WE CAN BE
HOPEFUL ALL OF THE OTHER
OPTIONS WHETHER IT BE THE
NATIONAL RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS, THE POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENTS OR THE VIRTUAL POWER
REDUCTION, YOU KNOW, THINGS
LIKE THAT THE CITY IS ACQUIRING
THE RENEWABLE CREDIT ON BEHALF
OF THE CITIZENS IN THE
COMMUNITY AND THEREFORE IT'S
PART OF THE CITY'S TAX BILL IN
SOME WAY SHORT OF CREDITS WHICH
I UNDERSTAND YOUR TEAM TO VERY,
VERY GOOD AT PURSUING BUT SO SO
THAT'S REALLY THE DISTINCTION
IS THAT THE BEHIND THE METERING
COMMUNITY SOLAR PERHAPS ARE
PAID FOR BY THE CUSTOMERS AND
WE'RE ASSUMING THAT THEY WOULD
DO SO THE VOLUNTARY BASIS
MOSTLY ONLY IF THE COST IS
SIMILAR TO OR CHEAPER THAN WHAT
THEY COULD OTHERWISE GET.
SO JUST ONE LAST IF IT'S OK IF
WE COMBINE IN THE SHORT RUN
STANDING THE SIU AND DOING
VIRTUAL POWER AGREEMENTS AND
YET THEY WOULD BE SEEING A
SAVINGS IN RATES THROUGH THE
ASSET YOU VERY LIKELY ONLY THE
PARTICIPANTS.
ONLY THE PARTICIPANTS.
YEAH OK RIGHT SO THEN THE
NONPARTICIPANTS WOULD NOT BE
SEEING A SAVING IN RATES BUT
THEY WOULD BE POSSIBLY SEEING
NO TAX.
OK GOOD THANK YOU.
I WOULD THOUGH THE COMBINATION
OF SEIYU AND POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENTS CETERA THERE'S A
SAVINGS IN RATES FOR THOSE WHO
ARE PART OF THE ICU BUT THERE'S
A TAX INCREASE OVERALL BECAUSE
WE GOT TO KNOW BECAUSE WE'RE
GOING TO GET THAT THROUGH
GRANTS OR FOR EXISTING FOR THE
EXISTING CITY BUDGET.
OK, KALTENBRUNNER THANK YOU.
I HAVE THREE QUESTIONS ALL
RELATED TO COST BUT I FIRST
HAVE TO THANK YOU MR. GESTUR
FOR YOUR THOROUGH PRESENTATION
AND JUST COMMENT ON THE IRONY
AT LEAST FROM MY PERSPECTIVE.
THIRTY YEARS AGO I WAS A CUB
REPORTER FOR THE STATE
NEWS COVERING EAST LANSING CITY
COUNCIL FOR YOU OF RELATIVELY
YOUNG TO AND NOW I'M AT THE
TABLE AND YOU'RE HERE
PRESENTING ALL OF THIS GREAT
INFORMATION TO US.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT.
A COUPLE OF THE THINGS THAT I
KNOW WEREN'T COVERED BUT I'M
WONDERING IF YOU EITHER HAVE
INFORMATION YOU CAN SHARE WITH
US OR THOUGHTS OR IF IT'S
SOMETHING WE CAN GET IN THE
FUTURE AND ONE IS THE COST
OF POTENTIAL LITIGATION.
IS THERE OBVIOUSLY LITIGATION
IS DEPENDENT ON JUST A WHOLE
RANGE OF FACTORS BUT IS THERE
SORT OF A LOW AND HIGH RANGE?
WE DON'T HAVE THAT NOW BUT WE
CAN FOLLOW UP YOU CAN FOLLOW UP
OK, AT LEAST GIVE SOME
PROMOTIONS ABOUT IT BUT YEAH OK
OK.
AND THEN THE SECOND THING THAT
DIDN'T SEEM TO BE
COVERED EITHER AND IS SOMETHING
THAT WILL NEED TO HAPPEN
WHETHER WE SUPPLIES OR WHETHER
DTI DOES IT IF THEY EVER DO IT
BUT THAT IS IMPROVING
RELIABILITY, IMPROVING THE
INFRASTRUCTURE AND WHAT THE
POTENTIAL COST WOULD BE TO
RATEPAYERS UNDER EACH OF THOSE
SCENARIOS WHETHER IT'S
MUNICIPAL OR DTI OWNED, WE ARE
CURRENTLY UNABLE TO PROVIDE
ESTIMATES FOR YOU TO DO IT.
IT REQUIRES A LOT
OF INFORMATION THAT DTI HAS AND
WE DO NOT SO THAT'S MAY NOT BE
WILLING TO GET THAT'S THE MOST
BASIC POINT WE COULD PROBABLY
IN A FUTURE EFFORT SOMEBODY
COULD PROVIDE YOU SOME LEVEL
OF ESTIMATES FOR THAT BUT IT
WOULD ALWAYS BE DEVOID
SUFFICIENT DETAIL TO REALLY BE
RELIED UPON.
WHAT I CAN DO IS TELL YOU AND
WE CAN FOLLOW UP ON THIS WHAT
HE IS SAYING THAT THEY ARE
PROPOSING TO DO ABOUT THE
RELIABILITY PROBLEM AND WHAT
THEIR COSTS ARE PROJECTIONS ARE
AND HOW THAT FLOWS INTO RATES
FOR EVERYBODY IN THEIR SERVICE
TERRITORY.
THEY ARE OBLIGATED TO FILE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM INVESTMENT
PLAN WITH THE PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION BY
SEPTEMBER 30TH.
SO IT'S JUST A FEW DAYS AWAY
AND I WOULD WANT TO LOOK AT
THAT AND HAVE YOUR TAKE A
LITTLE TIME BUT WE SHOULD BE
ABLE TO GIVE YOU A NOTION ABOUT
THAT BASED ON THEIR
REPRESENTATIONS.
THAT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM PLAN
JUST TO BE CLEAR IS JUST
NOTIONAL PLAN.
IT IS NOT THEN CONSIDERED
DIRECTLY BY THE PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION.
THERE WILL BE A DECISION
DIRECTLY ON IT.
THE DECISIONS ARE MADE IN RAPE
CASES AND VERY INCREMENTALLY SO
WE'RE WE'RE JUST FINISHING NEAR
FROM NEAR FINISHING A RAPE
CASE.
THE NEXT ONE WOULD PRESUMABLY
BE FILED NEXT YEAR AND SO IT'S
THE INFORMATION WILL EVOLVE
OVER TIME BUT AT LEAST WE CAN
PROVIDE AN ESTIMATE BASED ON
REPRESENTATION ABOUT THEIR
PLANS.
OK AND I THINK THIS KIND
OF GETS TO MY MY THIRD QUESTION
WHICH IS DO WE HAVE AN ESTIMATE
ON WHAT A PHASE TO STUDY MIGHT
COST SCOTT BURNHAM?
ARE YOU ABLE TO GET ON HERE?
YEAH.
SO WE CAN JUST BY WAY
OF INTRODUCTION, SCOTT'S FIRM
HAS DONE A MAJORITY OF THE
MUNICIPAL CAUSATION STUDIES IN
THE COUNTRY THE LAST SEVERAL
YEARS.
SO HE'S BEST QUALIFIED.
ANSWER YOUR QUESTION.
THERE YOU GO.
THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
BE HERE AND TO WORK WITH
EVERYONE AT THE CITY CITY
COUNCIL MEMBERS IN TERMS OF THE
PHASE TWO STUDY, YOU KNOW,
TRIBBITT IT IT DOES DEPEND
RIGHT.
IT DEPENDS ON WHAT THE SCOPE IS
.
I CAN TELL YOU RIGHT NOW WE ARE
DOING PHASE TWO FOR A MAJOR
MUNICIPAL EFFORT IN IN IN THE
UNITED STATES RIGHT NOW AND
THAT'S PHASE TWO BUDGET IS
APPROXIMATELY NINE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS NOW THAT
INCLUDES A LOT OF STRATEGIC
PLANNING THAT YOU GUYS HAVE
ALREADY DONE.
IT ALSO INCLUDES A LOT OF THE
INVESTIGATION FOR AN
ENGINEERING FIRM TO GO
BASICALLY WHAT WHAT WAS IN THE
PHASE ONE STUDY AND YOU KNOW,
IT WOULD MEAN WHAT LEVEL
OF DETAIL WE WANTED TO GET TO.
BUT I WOULD SAY, YOU KNOW, IT'S
A ROUGH ESTIMATE AROUND BETWEEN
300 AND 500 THOUSAND DOLLARS ON
AGAIN THE LEVEL OF EFFORT AND
ELEMENTS.
OK, THANK YOU.
THANKS SCOTT.
CATSA BRIGS HARRISON CA 01
GRENELLE
THANK YOU.
THIS IS A REALLY DENSE REPORT
SO I THINK IT'S GOING TO TAKE
TIME TO REALLY PROCESS WHAT'S
EVERYTHING THAT'S IN IT AND
COME WITH ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS
BUT SOME OF THE PIECES THAT
HAVEN'T BEEN COVERED THAT AND
THAT YOU DIDN'T GO INTO TOO
MUCH TONIGHT WERE SOME OF THE
THE ALIGNMENT WITH TWO ZERO
CRITERIA AND IN PARTICULAR SOME
OF THAT'S EASIER TO UNDERSTAND
THAN OTHERS.
BUT THE ONE THAT KIND OF POPS
OUT AT ME IS ONE AROUND EQUITY
AND JUSTICE.
AND SO I WAS CURIOUS IF YOU
COULD GO IN A LITTLE BIT MORE
ON SOME OF THE ASSUMPTIONS THAT
ARE MADE THERE IN PARTICULAR I
WOULD BE INTERESTED IN
UNDERSTANDING WHY COMMUNITY
SOLAR DOESN'T ALIGN WELL WITH
EQUITY JUSTICE AND THEN ALSO
WHEN IT COMES TO THE STRUCTURE
OF THAT WERE THAT WERE
STRUCTURES THAT WERE LOOKED AT
TRYING TO SCROLL THROUGH TO
MAKE SURE I SAID CORRECTLY DTT
IF I'M CALLING ENDS UP COMING
OUT IS GOOD OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT ON EQUITY AND JUSTICE
WHICH LEADS ME TO SOME
QUESTIONS BUT THEN
FOR THE
MUNICIPAL ENERGY UTILITY IT'S
IT'S POOR TO FAIR AND SO I'M
CURIOUS JUST HOW THESE WHAT ARE
HOW YOU DEFINING THIS?
SO THEY CERTAINLY ARE
CONSIDERATIONS FOR EQUALITY AND
JUSTICE OTHER THAN COST BUT
THOSE SCORES ARE DOMINATED BY
THE LIKELY COST TO LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS.
SO THAT'S REALLY THE CORE
OF THE ANSWER.
A LITTLE ELABORATION COMMUNITY
SOLAR SO COMMUNITY SOLAR IS
TYPICALLY A YOU A SOLAR ARRAY
THAT'S SOMEWHERE AWAY FROM THE
CUSTOMER SO EFFECTIVELY THAT
POWER IS SOLD TO THE UTILITY
AND THEN DELIVERED BY THE
UTILITY THE CUSTOMER AND THE
CUSTOMER GETS A BILL CREDIT FOR
IT.
THE UTILITIES THINK THAT THEY
NEED TO CHARGE THE FULL COST
OF DELIVERY FOR THAT ROUTE AND
THEN HOW THEY TREAT THE POWER
COST IS TYPICALLY IN DISPUTE.
BUT YOU KNOW, COMPARING THE
COST OF THE POWER FROM THAT
SOLAR FACILITY TO THE COST
OF POWER THEY OTHERWISE WOULD
HAVE SUPPLIED, THAT CAN
POTENTIALLY BE BENEFICIAL IN
COMMUNITY SOLAR IF THE COST
OF THE COMMUNITY SOLAR IS LOW
ENOUGH AND ECONOMIES OF SCALE
APPLY AND SO SMALL COMMUNITY
SOLAR PROJECT IS LIKELY TO BE
MORE EXPENSIVE THAN GRID POWER
A LARGER ONE PERHAPS LESS
EXPENSIVE BUT ABSENT SUBSIDY
TOOLS YOU'RE NOT LIKELY TO GET
ANY SIGNIFICANT REDUCTION
OF COST FOR A LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLD JUST BY VIRTUE
OF COMMUNITY SOLAR.
A NUMBER OF MY COLLEAGUES WORK
ON BEHALF OF LOW INCOME
COMMUNITIES AND ADVOCATE FOR
COMMUNITY SOLAR AND AN
IMPORTANT ELEMENT OF THAT WHICH
IS NOT AVAILABLE TO US UNDER
MICHIGAN LAW NOW IS THE
OPPORTUNITY TO ACCUMULATE SOME
WEALTH BASED ON YOUR OWNERSHIP
SHARE AND SO WE SCORED IT AS
THOUGH THAT IS NOT AVAILABLE.
THAT MIGHT SHIFT IT A BIT AT
LEAST ON THE JUSTICE SIDE
EQUITY AND JUSTICE SIDE IF
THERE WERE IF THERE WERE A
MECHANISM AVAILABLE FOR THAT
PURPOSE.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S HELPFUL.
A COUPLE MORE QUESTIONS SO I
OBVIOUSLY IT MAKES SENSE TO BE
WORKING WITH IT WITHIN OUR
TWENTY THIRTY TIME FRAME
BECAUSE THAT'S THAT'S WHAT OUR
GOALS ARE.
DO YOU BELIEVE THAT THE
PROJECTIONS WOULD HAVE SHIFTED
SUBSTANTIALLY IN TERMS
OF OPTIONS THAT WERE PRESENTED
TO US IF FOR EXAMPLE WE WERE
LOOKING AT A HORIZON OF TWENTY
THIRTY FIVE OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT IN TERMS OF THE
PARTICULARLY THINKING MORE
AROUND SORT OF ENERGY OPTIONS
THAT WE MIGHT PURSUE, YOU KNOW,
CERTAINLY BEHIND THE METER YOU
CAN ACCUMULATE MORE BY A LATER
DATE THAT WOULD BE TRUE WITH
COMMUNITY SOLAR IF THAT WERE AN
OPTION AND THEN IF YOU'RE DOING
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENTS
RATHER THAN AVOIDING IN ORDER
TO AVOID THE GENERIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDITS FROM THE
NATIONAL MARKET, YOU CAN DO
MORE OF THOSE ALSO BY A LATER
DATE.
UNFORTUNATELY WE ARE ALSO STILL
IN A PERIOD OF DECLINING COSTS
FOR RENEWABLES BOTH WIND AND
SOLAR.
AND SO LATER IS CHEAPER IN SOME
SENSE ALTHOUGH IT MEANS YOU
FORGO WHATEVER YOU WOULD HAVE
GOTTEN BENEFICIAL OUT OF IT
BEING AVAILABLE EARLIER UNDER
THE INFLATION REDUCTION ACT
THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY THAT
CIRCA TWENTY THIRTY TWO OR
LATER DEPENDING ON HOW FAR WE
GET AS A COUNTRY ON RENEWABLES
THAT SOME OF THE TAX CREDITS
MIGHT BEGIN TO FADE AWAY AND SO
YOU WOULDN'T WANT TO GO TOO
LONG BECAUSE YOU WOULD START TO
LOSE THOSE OPTIONS SO THAT
THERE'S FLEXIBILITY IN THE
TIMING AND IT COULD BE
BENEFICIAL TO GO A LITTLE
SLOWER IN TERMS OF THOSE HIGHER
QUALITY ELEMENTS.
BUT FUNDAMENTALLY IT'S STILL
THE SAME STORY.
OK, AND THEN FINALLY YOU AVAM
WAS SORT OF TAKEN OUT OF THE
EQUATION OF ANN ARBOR REACHING
OUR OUR GOALS AND YET THEY'RE
OBVIOUSLY A BIG PART OF OUR
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS AS A
COMMUNITY.
THEY HAVE THEIR OWN SET
OF GOALS AND THEY'RE WORKING
TOWARDS THAT.
BUT IN TERMS OF LEVERAGING
SOLUTIONS MORE QUICKLY, ARE
THERE ANY PIECES THAT YOU FEEL
LIKE WE AS A COMMUNITY SHOULD
BE THINKING ABOUT PARTNERSHIPS
ON OR YOU KNOW, JUST KIND
OF HOW DO WE LEVERAGE OUR
RESOURCES BETTER TOGETHER?
SO FIRST LET ME MAKE A POINT
ABOUT OUR ANALYSIS OF THE
MUNICIPAL UTILITY UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN OWNS THEIR OWN
DISTRIBUTION NETWORK SO YOU
WOULDN'T BE TAKING THAT OVER
AND THAT IS IN MOST INSTANCES
YOU KNOW, CONNECTED TO DTV
SUBSTATION'S THAT WOULD
CONTINUE TO OPERATE AND BE
OWNED BY DENHA IN THAT
SCENARIO.
SO WE JUST ASSUMED U OF M WAS
NOT INCLUDED IN THE MUNICIPAL
ZATION EFFORT.
MY UNDERSTANDING OF THEIR
CURRENT INTENT IS THAT THEY'RE
GOING TO PURSUE A MEETING,
THEIR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND
CLIMATE GOALS LARGELY WORKING
WITH SO PARTICIPATING IN
VOLUNTARY GREEN PRICING FOR
SOME OF THE ELECTRICITY AND SO
ON.
I HAVE NOT TALKED TO THEM ABOUT
THAT AND STUDIED IT CAREFULLY.
I KNOW YOUR CITY STAFF HAVE
DONE SO MUCH MORE SO BUT IF
THEY'RE DOING IT THROUGH DTC
THERE'S NOT NOT ANY GREAT
SYNERGY IF THEY WERE GOING TO
UNDERTAKE TO HAVE SOME PROJECTS
OF THEIR OWN THEN POTENTIALLY
JOINT PROJECTS COULD BE
OF INTEREST.
IT MAKES THEM LARGER LOWER COST
PER UNIT IS THAT KIND OF THING.
THANK YOU COUNCILMAN CARSON.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS.
SHE ACTUALLY ASKED THE QUESTION
I WAS GOING TO ASK BUT I HAVE A
FOLLOW UP QUESTION.
WELL, UNDER THE MINUTES I MEAN
IT'S SYMBOLIZATION OR MPU
OPTION YOU JUST SPOKE TO WHY
EQUITY JUSTICE RECEIVED A POOR
AND FAIR RATING AND WHAT THAT
MEANS YOU DEFINED IT AS WELL.
RATE IS LOW INCOME.
IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE DEFINING
JUST WE DIDN'T MEAN TO LIMIT IT
TO LOW INCOME BUT BECAUSE COST
WAS THE CONSIDERATION THAT
DROVE THE SCORING THAT WOULD BE
PRINCIPAL EFFECT OF CONCERN.
OK, MY FOLLOW UP QUESTION TO
THAT IS WHAT SOLUTION ARE THERE
TO MITIGATE THOSE ISSUES AND DO
YOU KNOW IF THERE'S ANY
MOVEMENT IN THE LEGISLATURE OR
TO THAT YOU ARE AWARE OF ?
IT'S A FOLLOW UP QUESTION TO
THAT QUESTION.
YEAH.
SO ON THERE ARE A VARIETY
OF WAYS THAT A UTILITY CAN
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO ITS LOW
INCOME CUSTOMERS.
UM, IN MICHIGAN RIGHT NOW
COMPANIES LIKE PTC AS A RESULT
OF A REQUIREMENT IN STATE LAW
FROM TWENTY TWELVE FORWARD
PROVIDE ESSENTIALLY A BREAK ON
THEIR RATES ON THEIR BILLS.
IT'S A FIXED AMOUNT PER MONTH
AND THEN THAT COST IS SPREAD TO
ALL OF THE OTHER CUSTOMERS A
BETTER METHOD THAT HAS BEEN
DONE IN A FEW STATES AND THAT
IS RECOMMENDED THE MICHIGAN
CLIMATE PLAN A HEALTHY CLIMATE
PLAN IS CALLED A PERCENTAGE
OF INCOME PAYMENT PLAN WHERE
ESSENTIALLY THE BILL IS CAPPED
AT A CERTAIN PERCENTAGE
OF INCOME AND THE COMMON NUMBER
OF REFERENCE FOR THAT SIX
PERCENT FOR COMBINED ELECTRIC
AND GAS SORT OF THE WHOLE
HOUSEHOLD ENERGY BILL EXCLUDING
TRANSPORTATION THERE ARE PILOT
PROJECTS FOR PERCENTAGE
OF INCOME PAYMENT PLANS
UNDERWAY.
RICK LYNCH HAS BEEN ONE OF THE
EXPERT WITNESSES PUSHING FOR
THOSE IN REGULATORY CASES AND
THOSE PILOTS ARE SIX MONTHS TO
A YEAR AWAY FROM REPORTS
RESULTS AND THEN THE POTENTIAL
TO HAVE THE PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION PUSH THAT FURTHER
AND IT COULD BE DONE IN MY VIEW
UNDER STATE LAW AS A KIND
OF UNIVERSAL SOLUTION.
BUT IMPLEMENTATION OF DECISIONS
WOULD BE UTILITY BY UTILITY OR
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES NOT
REGULATED BY THE COMMISSION
WOULD HAVE TO DECIDE TO DO THAT
AND THERE ARE SOME CONCERNS OR
LIMITATIONS THERE UNDER THE
BOLD DECISION ABOUT MUNICIPAL
FINANCE WHERE IF YOU CHARGE
OTHER THAN THE COST OF SERVICE
YOU START TO GET SOME
ENTANGLEMENTS.
THAT WOULD BE A QUESTION MARK
THAT YOU SHOULD HAVE IF YOU
TRIED TO GO FORWARD WITH THAT
UNDER A MUNICIPAL UTILITY.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE REASONS
THAT THERE'S A POSSIBILITY
OF DOING BETTER WITH DTV THAN
WITH THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY
RIGHT NOW
THE OTHER ASPECT
OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY IN OUR
UTILITY SYSTEM NOW IS UNEVEN
RELIABILITY AND WE HAVE
RELIABILITY PROBLEMS IN
WELL-OFF PLACES LIKE ANN ARBOR
BUT WE ALSO HAVE RELIABILITY
PROBLEMS IN PLACES THAT ARE NOT
WELL OFF AS A COMMUNITY AND
THERE'S SOME EVIDENCE THAT IT'S
WORSE PARTICULARLY IN THE
RECOVERY TIME AFTER AN OUTAGE.
SO THERE'S AN INEQUITY THERE.
BUT OF COURSE YOU'RE DOING
SOMETHING IN ANN ARBOR DOESN'T
REALLY SOLVE THAT PROBLEM
BECAUSE IT'S IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVEN'T EVEN
EVEN WORSE.
THAT'S HARD TO BELIEVE.
BUT YES, WAS THAT A SUFFICIENT
ANSWER TO YOUR QUESTION?
YES, IT COULD BE THOUGH IN
PARTS OF THE UNIVERSE SOME
AREAS OF THE ANN ARBOR
COMMUNITY IT'S UNDERSTOOD NOT
THAT ALL OF THE NUMBER IS WELL
MOST OF IT BUT THERE ARE
POCKETS.
SO THAT DOES ANSWER MY
QUESTION.
THANK YOU, CARL ZIMMER.
CORNELL, THANK YOU FOR
ANSWERING ALL OF OUR QUESTIONS.
YOU MENTIONED SEPTEMBER 30TH.
WE WOULD GET THE STATE WOULD BE
RECEIVING AN ASSESSMENT REPORT
FROM GTE AND I WAS CURIOUS YOU
MENTIONED OH MY SCOTT AS HAVING
GONE DOWN THE MUNICIPAL
ORGANIZATION ROUTE AND THEN
ABANDONING THEIR EFFORT AND I
WONDER IF DID DID THEY GET TO
THE POINT WHERE THEY WERE ABLE
TO DO ANY SORT OF ASSET
ANALYSIS TO DETERMINE FROM ANY
THING REGARDING IMPROVING
RELIABILITY AT ALL?
IS THERE SOMETHING WE BORROW
FROM THEM FOR SERVICE CONSUMERS
THAT DOESN'T REALLY AFFECT YOUR
QUESTION BUT JUST FOR CLARITY
IT WAS QUITE SOME TIME AGO,
RICK, YOU RECALL THE TWENTY WAS
NINETEEN NINETY FIVE.
YEAH, OK, SO ANY INFORMATION
WOULD BE OUTDATED AND FOR THE
WRONG COMPANY SO THAT'S ONE
POINT THEY PURSUED IT FAR OFF
THAT THERE WAS THIS DECISION BY
THE FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY
COMMISSION BUT THEY DIDN'T TAKE
IT VERY MUCH FURTHER.
THAT DECISION WASN'T
PARTICULARLY FAVORABLE AND
THERE WAS HEAVY POLITICAL
PRESSURE FROM CONSUMER TO
ABANDON THE CAUSE AND THEY DID
SO IT DID NOT GET CERTAINLY TO
A FINAL ANSWER ABOUT WHAT THEY
WOULD HAVE HAD TO PAY KATHAK.
THANK YOU.
YOU SAID THAT COST WAS AN
IMPORTANT FACTOR IN THE EQUITY
AND JUSTICE RATING AND I WONDER
IF THERE WAS ANY ATTEMPT OR IF
IT'S POSSIBLE TO INCORPORATE
THE COSTS OF STATUS QUO FOR
EXAMPLE, LOST GROCERIES
PURCHASE GAS GENERATORS TO
BUILD AN INDIVIDUAL RESISTANCE
HOTEL STATE'S EMERGENCY
SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE CITY
DAMAGE TO BASEMENTS BECAUSE
SOME PUMPS FAIL ALL OF THOSE
COSTS THAT WE KNOW PEOPLE ARE
INCURRING EVERY TIME WE HAVE AN
OUTAGE, IS THERE SOME WAY TO DO
SO FIRST BECAUSE WE WERE
COMPARING THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY
TO DTV WITHOUT RELIABILITY
IMPROVEMENTS ABSENT RELIABILITY
IMPROVEMENTS, THERE WOULDN'T BE
A BIG CHANGE IN ANY OF THOSE
NUMBERS THAT SAID, I'VE DONE A
FAIR AMOUNT OF TESTIMONY ON THE
COSTS OF OUTAGES AND THE
CHALLENGES THAT WE HAVE IN
MICHIGAN BECAUSE OF THE POOR
RELIABILITY FROM GUITY AND
CONSUMERS.
THERE IS A BODY OF LITERATURE
ON ON THIS AND IT HAS BEEN
SUMMARIZED A COUPLE OF TIMES BY
RESEARCHERS AT LAWRENCE
BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY.
IF YOU REALLY WANT DETAILS
THERE ARE A BUNCH OF EQUATIONS
AROUND THAT.
BUT AS A GENERAL PROPOSITION
THE AVERAGE COST OF AN OUTAGE
TO A RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER IS ON
THE ORDER OF FOUR DOLLARS AN
HOUR OF OUTAGE.
IT'S ACTUALLY THERE'S A JUST A
COST OF THE OUTAGE THAT'S YOU
MODEST AND THEN IT DEPENDS ON
THE DURATION AND AND OF COURSE
IF YOU GET TO MULTIPLE DAYS IT
GETS WORSE BECAUSE YOU START
GETTING INTO SURVIVAL COSTS AND
SOME OF THE KINDS INJURY THAT
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THAT DON'T
HAPPEN IN THE FIRST FEW HOURS.
WHAT ARE THE DEFICIENCIES
OF THE EVIDENCE IN THAT
LITERATURE IS THAT ALMOST ALL
OF IT IS FOR SHORTER OUTAGES.
THE ORIGINAL VERSION WAS
LIMITED TO EIGHT HOURS.
THE CURRENT VERSION IS
NOMINALLY UP TO TWENTY FOUR
HOURS BUT THE EVIDENCE IS WEAK
ABOVE ABOUT 16 AND THEN WHEN
YOU GET TO MULTIDAY OUTAGES
LIKE WE HAVE THE REALLY IS NO
ECONOMETRIC EVIDENCE OF THE
OF THE COSTS THAT CAN BE RELIED
UPON.
I AM SURE IT'S HIGHER THAN IT
IS FOR THOSE SHORTER OUTAGES.
I'M ALSO SURE IT'S HIGHER FOR
MORE WIDESPREAD OUTAGES.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU HAVE AN OUTAGE
AT YOUR HOUSE BUT YOUR FRIEND
ACROSS TOWN HAS POWER AND YOU
CAN GO OVER THERE THAT'S MUCH
LESS INJURIOUS THAN IF
EVERYBODY IN TOWN IS OUT AND
YOU JUST HAVE TO SUFFER.
THE LAST POINT I WOULD MAKE
ABOUT THOSE ASSESSMENTS IS THEY
HAVE NOT TREATED LOW INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS DIFFERENTLY.
SO IF YOU'RE SOMEBODY LIKE ME,
I'VE GOT SOME MONEY IN THE BANK
,YOU KNOW, SOME LIFETIME
WEALTH IF I SUFFER THOSE KINDS
OF LOSSES IT'S A IT'S A
MONETARY COST TO ME BUT I DON'T
HAVE TO EXPERIENCE ALL OF THE
HARMS BECAUSE I CAN GO STAY IN
A HOTEL OR EAT AT A RESTAURANT
OR WHATEVER.
YOU KNOW, THE MITIGATION
MEASURE IS SOMEONE THAT DOES
NOT HAVE THE CASH FLOW
CAPABILITY TO PAY FOR THAT
MITIGATION HAS TO SUFFER IT AND
THEREFORE IT'S WORSE FOR THEM
AND THE EVIDENCE TO DATE IS
VERY WEAK IN
ITS TREATMENT
OF LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS OR
COMMUNITIES IN THAT RESPECT.
SO I WANTED TO SAY ALL OF THAT
BECAUSE I WANTED TO SORT
OF UNDERSTAND THE STATE OF THE
ART BUT I CAN FOLLOW UP WITH
SOME CALCULATIONS BASED ON HOW
DID YOU EXPERIENCE IN THIS AREA
THAT WOULD GIVE YOU A NOTION
OF WHAT OUTAGES COST THE
COMMUNITY.
IT'S JUST THAT YOU CAN'T EXPECT
THAT THOSE WILL BE FIXED BY ANY
OF THE MEASURES THAT WE
DESCRIBED BECAUSE OUR TASK WAS
TO LOOK AT HOW DO YOU GET 100
PERCENT RENEWABLES AND WHAT
WOULD IT TAKE TO MAKE THIS
PLACE COUNTERASSAULT IF WE'RE
GOING TO GO DOWN THE PATH OF OF
TRYING TO ESTIMATE THE COST PER
HOUSEHOLD?
I'D BE REALLY INTERESTED IN
ALSO TAKING A LOOK AT HOW THE
COSTS ARE BORNE BY SOCIAL
SERVICE AGENCIES ARE TO IN
RESPONSE TO THIS EMERGENCY WORK
WE THE SEE ITSELF WE SET UP
EMERGENCY EMERGENCY SHELTERS
BEFORE BUT OUR FOOD BANKS HAVE
TO STEP IN IN THOSE ARE PRIVATE
NONPROFITS THAT HAVE TO
FUNDRAISE SOME RECEIVE SOME
PUBLIC FUNDING ON THE COUNTY
LEVEL BUT WE ARE ALREADY FACING
THE INCREASED DEMAND AND LIKE
FOOD INSECURITY ISSUES IN OUR
AREA ARE ARE SIGNIFICANT AND WE
DON'T HAVE THE SAME CONDITIONS
THAT WE HAD WHEN THERE WAS
FEDERAL FUNDING FOR FOOD
HOUSING.
SO I'M INTERESTED IN SEEING IF
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IMPACTS IN
THE HARM.
THERE'S ALSO THOSE THOSE
IMPACTS AND HARMS THAT ARE
BORNE BY A NUMBER OF AGENCIES
WHO PROVIDE FOOD BUT ALSO
SHELTER IN TESTIMONY AND
STAKEHOLDER PROCESSES BEFORE
MICHIGAN PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION I'VE RAISED THAT
ISSUE AS WELL AS THE MUNICIPAL
COSTS ON MULTIPLE OCCASIONS AS
SOMETHING THAT NEEDS TO BE
ADDRESSED.
BUT THERE IS ESSENTIALLY NO
EVIDENCE TO QUANTIFY THOSE
COSTS.
SO IT'S WORK SOMEONE NEEDS TO
DO BUT HAS NOT BEEN DONE.
I MEAN AT THE FEDERAL LEVEL
WITH THE DISASTER RESPONSES WE
KNOW THE COST OF SAY THE RED
CROSS STEPPING IN BUT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT SMALL FOOD
PANTRIES AND WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, SHELTERS
HAVING TO STEP IN FOR A
CORPORATE GIANT.
YEAH, NO, YOU'RE RIGHT.
I AGREE.
YOU'RE CORRECT.
THOSE ARE ABSOLUTELY REAL COSTS
TO JUST THE RESEARCH HASN'T
BEEN DONE TO PUT NUMBERS ON.
I APPRECIATE IT.
THANK YOU.
LOOKS LIKE WE ARE KNOCKING UP
AGAINST 815 AND THEY'RE STILL
AT LEAST ONE OR TWO MORE
COUNCIL MEMBERS WHO WANT
QUESTIONS.
PERHAPS WE ROLL TILL NINE AND
THAT BEER COUNCIL MEMBERS THAT
JUST GOT TO GENERAL NOT OR NOT
.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S KEEP IT AT NINE AND SEE
WHERE WE ARE IF WE'RE STILL IF
WE'RE TALKING COUNTERMARCH
ZERO.
THANK YOU.
THIS PRESENTATION HAS SUPER
HELPFUL AND ALSO MY THANKS TO
MY COLLEAGUES AND SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT I ALSO HAD IN
MIND.
I WANTED TO ASK YOU IN TERMS
OF CURRENT MAPPING OF OUR
OF OUR INFRASTRUCTURE AS IT
EXISTS AND WHAT AREAS OF OUR
INFRASTRUCTURE MIGHT HAVE MORE
RELIABILITY OR HAVE WORSE
REBOUND TIMES ARE BEING ABLE TO
COME BACK ON THAT AM I CORRECT
AND SAY THAT THAT'S NOT
POSSIBLE BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE
ALL THE INFORMATION THAT WE
NEED TO DO THAT OR HAS THAT
BEEN DONE ON IT HAS NOT YET
BEEN DONE.
I DON'T PERSONALLY HAVE THE
INFORMATION BUT DTC HAS
COMMITTED THROUGH A COUPLE
OF CASES NOW THAT THEY WILL
START TO PROVIDE MAPPED
RELIABILITY INFORMATION TO THE
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION AND
ON PUBLIC WEBSITE AT A CENSUS
TRACT LEVEL WHICH IS NOT AS
REFINED AS YOU WOULD BE
INTERESTED IN BUT IS A GREAT
STEP BUT TOWARD GREATER
GRANULARITY THAN THE DTI WIDE
NUMBERS THAT WE'RE TYPICALLY
ABLE TO USE.
SO THERE WOULD BE YOU KNOW I
DON'T KNOW THE COUNTIES CENSUS
TRACTS IN ANN ARBOR BUT 15 OR
20 MAYBE YOU KNOW THAT WOULD BE
IT WOULD PROVIDE THAT LEVEL
OF GRANULARITY AND I THINK THAT
I CAN'T PROMISE THIS BECAUSE
I'M NOT IN CONTROL OF IT BUT I
THINK THAT WOULD BE AVAILABLE
EARLY NEXT YEAR.
MM.
AND THEN YOU KNOW, IF WE HAVE
SOME DATA ON RELIABLE AND OR
TIMES REBOUNDING BY CENSUS
TRACK THEN PRESUMABLY WE COULD
ALSO POTENTIALLY SEE SOME
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION ABOUT
WHAT NEIGHBORHOOD TO WHAT
POPULATION TRENDS MIGHT HAVE A
WORSE RELIABILITY IN THE
INFRASTRUCTURE OF THE MICHIGAN
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT,
GREAT LAKES AND ENERGY HAS BEEN
WORKING FOR A WHILE ON AN
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE SCREENING
TOOL WHICH IS MAP BASED AND HAS
ALL OF THAT KIND OF INFORMATION
ALREADY IN PART OF THE
COMMITMENT THAT THE COMMISSION
HAS MADE AND I THINK HE HAS
MADE IS TO PUT IS TO OVERLAY
THESE RELIABILITY DATA WITH THE
DATA IN THE ENVIRONMENTAL
JUSTICE SCREENING TOOL.
SO I THINK THAT WILL ACTUALLY
HAPPEN.
I JUST I'M NOT QUITE WELL
HOPEFULLY WHEN WE DO HAVE SOME
OF THAT DATA WE CAN MAYBE
INTEGRATE IT INTO OUR PLANS FOR
IF WE HAVE AN ICU OR WHATEVER
WHAT WHAT AREAS OF THE CITY OR
WHAT NEIGHBORHOODS MIGHT NEED
MORE INFRASTRUCTURE A MORE
ASSISTANCE.
SO THANK YOU OF COURSE FURTHER
QUESTIONS I'VE GOT A I'VE GOT A
COUPLE IF I CAN.
SO FIRST JUST JUST SORT OF ADD
ONE QUESTION ABOUT SOME OF THE
TEXT IN THE ABOUT THE INTERVIEW
AND WHEN IT WAS GOING TO BE,
YOU KNOW, EVEN POTENTIAL TO
LAUNCH AND THERE ARE SOME BACK
AND FORTH IN THE AND THE
REPORT.
BUT AS I HEARD YOU SAYING HERE
PRETTY CLEARLY AND I THINK IT'S
THE THE THRUST THAT IT IS EVEN
IF IT WERE TO GET UP OFF THE
GROUND, IT WOULD BE A POST
TWENTY THIRTY OPERATION.
THAT IS TO SAY IT WOULD NOT BE
OPERATIONAL PRIOR TO TWENTY
THIRTY.
THAT IS OUR VIEW UNLESS YOU
ASKED ME YOU KNOW NEXT YEAR AND
THEY SAID YES AND THEN YOU
COULD GET STARTED WORKING ON IT
BUT I DON'T OK WANT TO TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT ABOUT COST
BECAUSE COST IS IS OBVIOUSLY
WELL PERHAPS NOT OBVIOUSLY BUT
CERTAINLY FROM MY PERSPECTIVE
WHERE WE'RE A LOT OF THIS COMES
DOWN WE'VE KNOWN FROM OUR WELL
OUR CONVERSATIONS IN OUR IN OUR
LIVES IN THE SURVEY THAT WE SEE
THAT COST IS AN IMPORTANT
ELEMENT TO WELL IT'S COST IS AN
IMPORTANT ELEMENT TO EVERYTHING
WE DO HERE AT THE TABLE.
BUT IN ALL OF OUR DAILY LIVES
THE REPORT SORT OF DESCRIBES TO
TO POTENTIAL METHODOLOGIES AS
IT DESCRIBES THE LOW END IN THE
HIGH END THINKING THROUGH JUST
TOUCHING A LITTLE BIT UP ON THE
LOW END.
THE REPORT INDICATES THAT DTD
ACTUAL RECORDS MAY YIELD
SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT RESULTS
THAN THE LOW END ESTIMATE THAT
WE HAVE HERE AND THAT'S FAIR
BECAUSE WE HAVEN'T HAD ACCESS
TO WHAT IS REALLY IN THE
GROUND.
IS IT FAIR TO ASSUME THE
DIRECTIONALITY OF THAT
SUBSTANTIALLY NEW INFORMATION
THAT IS TO SAY IS THERE A
REASONABLE SCENARIO WHERE THAT
NEW INFORMATION THAT WE GET
FROM DTI ABOUT WHAT'S ACTUALLY
IN THE GROUND RESULTS IN A LOW
END METHODOLOGY THAT'S LESS
THAN WHAT IS IN THIS REPORT?
IS THERE ANY SCENARIO WE CAN'T
RULE IT OUT BECAUSE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT A SAMPLING DONE
BY AN ENGINEER GOING AND
LOOKING AT STUFF ESTIMATING
AGES AND THAT SORT OF THING TO
GET A REASONABLE COST.
I'M NOT AWARE THAT THERE WAS
ANY BIAS IN THAT METHOD SO I
HAVE TO ENTERTAIN THE
POSSIBILITY THAT IT WOULD GO
DOWN.
BUT MORE LIKELY IT WOULD GO UP
JUST BECAUSE THERE ARE THINGS
WE CAN'T SEE RIGHT IN JUST
DRIVING AROUND THE CITY LOOKING
AT THINGS PIECES AND PARTS THAT
WE CAN'T SEE AND SO ON.
SO THOSE ARE ESTIMATED BUT NOT
BY ANY MEANS CERTAIN.
IT WOULD BE FAIR OF ME TO ASK
SCOTT BURNHAM WHOSE FIRM PUT
THAT TOGETHER TO FOLLOW UP A
LITTLE BIT ON THAT QUESTION IF
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
OF COURSE HE'S GOT YOU.
THERE IS A VERY INTERESTING
QUESTION.
YOU KNOW, LIKE LIKE INDICATED
WE TOOK A SAMPLING APPROACH
THAT WAS YOU KNOW, WE WERE IN
THE FIELD ENGINEER GROUP WAS IN
THE FIELD FOR FOUR DAYS AND SO
WE WERE TRYING TO BASICALLY GET
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SYSTEM
DURING THAT PERIOD OF TIME AND
FOR A PHASE ONE FEASIBILITY
STUDY WE FELT AS WE DID, YOU
KNOW, A REASONABLE ESTIMATE.
YOU KNOW, SOME OF THE EARLIER
ABOUT ABOUT FACE TO FACE
CHILDREN INVOLVED FOR FIELD
TIME FOR THE ENGINEERS TO TO
NARROW THAT UNCERTAINTY AROUND
THE ASSETS THEMSELVES AND
CERTAINLY, YOU KNOW, INDICATED
HAS HAD THE BEST INFORMATION.
YOU KNOW, WE'VE AND MORE
RESEARCH WE CAN LOWER THAT THAT
ON CERTAINTY.
BUT WE WOULD WE WOULD LIKELY
NEVER GET TO THE EXACT NUMBERS
THAT DATA IS RIGHT JUST BECAUSE
THEY THEY THEY HAVE THAT
INVENTORY THAT'S THERE THEIR
RATE BASE SO
IF I CAN JUST
FOLLOW UP PLEASE NOT DIRECTLY
RESPONSIVE TO YOUR QUESTION BUT
THE MAJOR UNCERTAINTY ON THAT
LOW END IS WHAT RULES APPLY SO
THAT THE METHOD THAT WE USED
FOR THE LOW END WAS TO SAY YOU
CAN TAKE OVER THE ASSETS BY
PAYING THE CURRENT BOOK VALUE
OF THOSE ASSETS THE ORIGINAL
COST PLUS DEPRECIATION FOR THE
DISTRIBUTION ASSETS AND THEN
APPLY THE INCOME BASED METHOD
THAT THE FIRST QUARTER
ADDRESSED TO ONLY THE POWER
SUPPLY COSTS AND IN SOME SENSE
THE MOST FAVORABLE
INTERPRETATION OF THAT ASSUMING
THAT EVERY BIT OF POWER THEY
WOULD HAVE SOLD TO PEOPLE IN
ANN ARBOR COULD BE SOLD INTO
THE WHOLESALE MARKET AND AND
THOSE KINDS OF THINGS.
SO THAT'S THE THAT'S THE LOW
END CONCERN.
THE MORE YOU MOVE TO RELIANCE
ON INCOME HAVING TO PAY THEM
FOR LOST INCOME, THE BIGGER THE
NUMBER GETS.
YOU KNOW, I WANTED TO GET TO
THAT TOUCH ABOUT THIS.
WELL, LET'S YOU MOVED THERE SO
MAYBE I'LL MOVE THERE TO AM I
WRONG THAT THE AMA CASE
RECOGNIZED GOING CONCERN
COMPENSATION FOR DISTRIBUTION
INCOME THAT IS ONE OF THE AREAS
WHERE WE THOUGHT THAT THERE WAS
SOME AMBIGUOUS LANGUAGE IN THE
FIRST ORDER AND THEREFORE
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY TO
INTERPRET IT AS WE DID IN THE
REPORT.
BUT CERTAINLY THEIR FOCUS THE
FIRST FOCUS WAS ON INCOME BASED
COMPENSATION AND THE LOW END
DESCRIPTION IS ESSENTIALLY BOOK
VALUE.
YEAH, YES.
FOR THE FOR THE DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM AND MISSY JUST REMINDED
ME THAT WE DO HAVE ATTORNEYS
THAT WORKED ON THE PROJECT ON
THE CALL.
SO TIM YOU OUT THERE TO MONGAN
?
YES.
HEY, SO YOU WANT TO CORRECT ME
OR EXTEND MY WELL I WOULD SAY
THE THE O'KELLEY NUMBER WHICH
WAS SUPPOSED TO CAPTURE THE
ASSET VALUE OF THE DISTRIBUTION
FACILITIES FOR PURPOSES OF THE
REPORT ON THE LOW END WE USED A
ONE POINT FIVE TIMES THAT
NUMBER.
SO THAT WAS IT WAS HIRED TO
SUPPLY VALUE WHICH IS SOME
VALUE FOR THE REVENUE FROM THE
1960S.
GOOD CORRECTION.
THANK YOU.
THAT'S US.
I THINK THAT WAS TO MY PRIOR
QUESTION THAT WASN'T AS TO MY
SECOND QUESTION WITH RESPECT TO
THE CASE RECOGNIZING
DISTRIBUTION INCOME.
DO YOU WANT TO COMMENT ON THAT,
TIM?
DID YOU UNDERSTAND THE QUESTION
THIS IS JUST ANOTHER WITH TIM.
THE THE DECISION IS IS A LITTLE
DIFFICULT TO INTERPRET I THINK
WITH RESPECT TO DISTRIBUTION MY
AND MY READ IT IT IS
ESSENTIALLY THAT IF THE CITY
WERE TO OTHERWISE PAY UTILITY
FOR THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
THAT THE DISTRIBUTION AND
RELATED REVENUES WOULD NOT BE
INCLUDED WITHIN THAT INCOME
BASED METHOD.
BUT THE DECISION WAS NOT
PARTICULARLY CLEAR ON EXACTLY
WHAT THAT KIND OF OTHER
COMPENSATION PAID FOR
DISTRIBUTION WOULD NECESSARILY
BE IN ORDER TO.
YEAH, IT'S NOT INCIDENTALLY
THAT THE THE CASE WAS NEVER
SOLVED SO THERE WERE SOME MORE
HYPOTHETICALS THAT WERE
INVOLVED WHEREBY THE CITY WAS
TALKING ABOUT PERHAPS THEY
COULD LEASE ACCESS TO THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FROM
CONSUMERS ENERGY AND THE COURT
WAS BASICALLY SAYING WELL IF
THAT WERE TO BE THE CASE THAT
WERE TO HAPPEN, THE REVENUES
THAT CONSUMERS WOULD HAVE
GOTTEN FROM THAT WOULD BE
SUBTRACTED FROM FROM THEIR
STANDARD ALSO TO TREAT THOSE AS
AS PAYMENT FOR THE DISTRIBUTION
ASSETS AND THAT'S SIMILAR WENT
THROUGH A COMBINATION
OF PROCESS AND THE CITY WERE
TAKEN DOWN THOSE ASSETS THEN
THE PAYMENT RECEIVED THROUGH
THAT PROCESS WOULD BE TREATED
AS AS THE PAYMENT THERE WOULD
HAVE BEEN A DETERMINATION MADE
SENSE OF THOSE YOU KNOW THEN
THERE'S MORE INCOME BASED
CALCULATION ST. WHAT SO I'M
JUST TRYING TO THINK THROUGH
THE TWO NODE'S AGAIN THE ONE
THE LOW NOTE RECOGNIZE IS GOING
CONCERN PAYMENTS FOR FOR POWER
BUT PROJECTS GOING CONCERN
PAYMENTS FOR DISTRIBUTION AND
YET THE INITIALIZATION EFFECTS
THE SEIZURE, THE DISTRIBUTION
INCOME STREAM BUT NOT A SEIZURE
OF THE POWER STREAM RIGHT.
GENERATING ASSETS IN THE CITY
SO THAT THE POWER THE THE
UTILITIES EXPECTED TO SELL THAT
POWER IS NOT GOING TO BE FITTED
INTO THE THE POWER THAT WOULD
HAVE OTHERWISE IN THE CITY
WOULD GO INTO THE WHOLESALE
MARKET.
SO THERE WOULD BE AN OBLIGATION
THAT THEY WOULD BE EXPECTED
EXPECTED AND THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE WHOLESALE PRICE AND
WHAT THEY WOULD HAVE EXPECTED
TO RECEIVE FROM THE CITY IS A
VALUE THAT THAT MIGHT BE
TREATED AS A STANDARD COST
VALUES IN THERE AS WELL.
AND THIS IS THERE ARE A LOT
OF LEADS THAT WE CAN GET INTO
HERE BUT AND THIS IS WHERE THE
ARGUMENTS BEGIN TO PLAY OUT IN
TERMS OF APPROACHING THE
MAINTENANCE COSTS FOR THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM OR FOR THAT
WE'RE ALSO NOT GOING TO HEAR
THOSE ANYMORE.
HOW ARE THOSE CREDIT?
THERE'S THERE'S A LOT
OF VARIOUS YOU CAN SLICE THAT
PIE AND THAT'S WHAT MAKES
CALCULATINGLY SO DIFFICULT.
OK,
SO THEN TO JUST TO MAKE
SURE THEY ALSO UNDERSTAND HOW
THAT YOU KNOW, WE HAVE WE HAVE
THESE TWO NODES AND I'M NOT
SURE I'VE HEARD THE RATIONALE
FOR FOR FOR THAT.
BUT YOU KNOW WHAT?
MAYBE LEAVE THAT TO ANOTHER DAY
.
THE YEAR TO WHATEVER THE COST
ESTIMATES ARE THAT HAD BEEN
PROVIDED THAT THE TWO
METHODOLOGIES IT'S CLEAR THAT
THAT RANGE INCLUDES ONLY THE
COST OF ACQUIRING THE ASSETS AS
THEY ARE.
DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY
IMPROVEMENTS TO TO ADDRESS THE
SUBSTANTIAL AND AND CLEATUS
RELIABILITY AND RESILIENCE
CONDITIONS THAT WE THAT WE THAT
WE CURRENTLY EXPERIENCE THAT
THAT WOULD BE IN ANY SCENARIO
OVERLAYED?
IS THAT CORRECT?
YOU'RE CORRECT.
OK, AND THAT NOT JUST
RELIABILITY BUT ALSO FOR
INCREASED AND RESILIENCE BUT
ALSO FOR REQUIRING INCREASED
CAPACITY BECAUSE AS WE ARE
COPING AND WORKING TO
ACCOMPLISH GREATER
ELECTRIFICATION TOO WOULD BE AN
OVERLAYED COST, IT WOULD WANT
TO POINT OUT A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN CONCERN FOR RELIABILITY
AND CAPACITY.
I PRESUME THAT IF YOU WERE
TAKING THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
OVER PROBABLY FOR PURPOSES
OF IMPROVING RELIABILITY THAT
YOUR CITIZENS WOULD EXPECT YOU
TO ACT IMMEDIATELY ON THAT.
YES, AS I SHOWED IN EARLY SLIDE
OUR PROJECTIONS OF YOUR NEED
FOR INCREASED CAPACITY IS THAT
THAT DOESN'T REALLY COME UNTIL
THE MID 20S, 30S AND IT'S STILL
GRADUAL OUT.
YOU KNOW, FROM THERE YOU WOULD
NOT SEE LIKE A UNIFORM
REQUIREMENT FOR INCREASED
CAPACITY ACROSS THE CITY BUT
RATHER LOCALIZED AS DIFFERENT
NEIGHBORHOODS MADE THE
TRANSITION TO ELECTRIFICATION
AND THAT SORT OF THING.
SO IT'S VERY LIKELY THAT THE
INVESTMENT IN RELIABILITY WOULD
BE PRETTY EARLY IN THE LIFE
OF THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY AND
THAT THE INCREASE IN CAPACITY
WOULD BE GRADUAL AND LATER OK,
WHICH WOULD MEAN THAT IT
PROBABLY COULD BE DONE MORE
ECONOMICALLY AS A SORT
OF PLANNED TRANSITION THAT
WHATEVER THE THE COSTS ARE TO
ACCOMPLISH THOSE TWO THOSE
THOSE TWO GOALS LIKE
RESILIENCE, RELIABILITY,
CAPACITY IF THIS WERE TO BE
STOOD UP THEN WE COULD LARGE
PAY ON THE ON THE UP FRONT TO
GET AS MUCH RESILIENCE,
RELIABILITY IMPROVEMENT AS
PHYSICALLY AND FINANCIALLY
POSSIBLE AT THAT TIME AND DO
FOCUS ON CAPACITY BECAUSE
THAT'S A LATER OCCURRING
REQUIREMENT.
YES.
AND ONE OTHER POINT I SHOULD
MENTION PERHAPS AS WELL
INCREASING CAPACITY
REQUIREMENTS IS BECAUSE
OF INCREASING ELECTRICITY SALES
,THE ADDITIONAL QUANTITY
OF ELECTRICITY BEING SOLD MAY
COMPLETELY MITIGATE THE COST
OF THE INCREMENTAL CAPACITY
BECAUSE IT'S SPREAD ACROSS A
LARGER NUMBER OF KILOWATT HOURS
AND THAT'S A LITTLE HARD TO SAY
FOR SURE JUST DEPENDS ON THE
TIMING OF THINGS.
BUT IT DOESN'T NECESSARILY
INCREASE CAPACITY TO SUPPORT
ELECTRIC DOES NOT NECESSARILY
LEAD TO A RATE INCREASE.
OK, I GUESS MY LAST QUESTION
JUST GOING I DO WANT TO HONOR
NINE O'CLOCK AND THIS IS ABOUT
THE PHASE TWO FEASIBILITY STUDY
WHICH WHICH I HEARD A HARD BIT
AT IT THREE THREE TO FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND IF I CALL THAT
THE YEAH WE'LL CUT YOUR 10
PERCENT DON'T LIKE WHAT THE
PHASE TWO FEASIBILITY STUDY IS
GOING TO GO.
WHAT WOULD GO FURTHER TO
CHARACTERIZE THE COSTS
OF MUNICIPAL CAUSATION THAT
THAT WOULD GO FURTHER TO
CHARACTERIZE WHAT I ASSUME TO
BE THE CALL THAT WHAT IT WOULD
COST US HERE IN ANN ARBOR TO
ACCOMPLISH OUR RELIABILITY,
RESILIENCE AND ULTIMATELY
CAPACITY INCREASE AND BY
EXTENSION JUST TO EMPHASIZE
BECAUSE I THINK IT'S CLEAR THAT
WE ALL NEED TO UNDERSTAND OR WE
ALL NEED TO BE ON THE SAME PAGE
THAT WOULD MEAN WHATEVER
METHODOLOGY YOU KNOW,
DISTRIBUTION ASSET DISTRIBUTION
,INCOME GROWTH GOING CONCERN
OR NOT ADDITIONAL REPAIR COST.
FIRST LET ME AFFIRM THE LAST
POINT.
YES.
ADDITIONAL REPAIR COSTS FOR THE
RELIABILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
SCOTT SPEAK FOR HIMSELF AS TO
WHETHER HIS ESTIMATE OF FIRM OR
OTHERWISE OF THE COSTS OF PHASE
TWO STUDY INCLUDES ANY
ASSESSMENT OF WHAT IT WOULD
COST TO IMPROVE RELIABILITY.
PHASE TWO IS PERHAPS THE TERM
OF ART BUT IT'S WHAT YOU DEFINE
IT TO BE WHEN YOU'RE BUYING THE
SERVICE SO I'M NOT SURE WHAT HE
WAS ASSUMING.
YOU WANT TO COMMENT ON THAT TO
SCOTT TO COMMENT ON THAT.
FIRST OF ALL, I'D LIKE TO
REITERATE THAT THIS
ANNOUNCEMENT OBVIOUSLY I'M PART
OF A TEAM OF COURSE I WOULD YOU
KNOW, I CANNOT SPEAK FOR THE
ENGINEERING FOLKS WHEN I WAS A
VISITING RELATIVE TO THAT RANGE
OF OF COURSE THERE WAS REALLY
JUST MORE FIELD WORK IN TERMS
UNDERSTANDING THE ASSETS THAT
ARE OUT THERE IN THE FIELD LIKE
YOU KNOW, LIKE I SAID, WE WERE
OUT THERE FOR, YOU KNOW, THREE
OR FOUR DAYS.
YOU KNOW, WE WOULD BE OUT THERE
FOR LONGER THAN THAT.
AND AGAIN, THAT'S GOING TO BE A
FUNCTION OF HOW MUCH TIME AND
EFFORT THE ENGINEER TELLS ME
HOW LONG IT'S GOING TO TAKE AND
YOU KNOW THAT THE THE BIGGEST
DRIVER AS WE JUST SPOKE ABOUT,
YOU KNOW, IS IS CLOSER TO THE
VALUATION METHODOLOGY WHICH IS
WHICH IS A LEVEL QUESTION BUT
NOT A LINEAR OR THIS ANALYSIS
WAS NOT NECESSARILY IN WITHIN
ITS CAPACITY.
SO THAT WAS THAT WOULD REQUIRE
YOU TO GET TO GIVE YOU AN
ESTIMATE ON WHAT THAT MIGHT BE
.
BUT THE THE PRIMARY TO GO TO
THE FIELD AND REDUCE THE
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT THE ASSETS
AND THAT I GOT TO
DISTRACTIBILITY BUT THAT
INCLUDES THE RELIABILITY AND
THE COST NEEDED FOR RELIABILITY
IMPROVEMENTS.
NO, NO IT WOULD NOT INCLUDE
WHAT TO DO WITH RELIABILITY AS
DOUGLAS INDICATED.
YOU KNOW, WE WOULD NEED TO LOOK
AT WHAT BEATTIE'S PLAN SOUNDS
LIKE THAT'S COMING OUT HERE IN
A FEW DAYS.
BUT YOU WOULD NEED TO COME UP
WITH A DISTRIBUTION PLAN AND
DOCUMENT SPECIFIC LAW AND ORDER
AND YOU WOULD NEED TO GO
THROUGH AND UNDERSTAND WHERE
THE FAILURES ARE AND WHY
THEY'RE OCCURRING.
IS IT A QUESTION OF VEGETATION
?
IS IT A QUESTION OF CAPACITY ON
THE CONDUCTOR?
IS IT A QUESTION OF EQUIPMENT
FAILURE DUE TO AGE OR WHATEVER
IT MAY BE?
AND THAT ASSESSMENT WOULD BE IT
WOULD BE A MUCH LARGER EFFORT
FOR THAT FOR SURE.
AND I WOULD BE HESITANT FOR
THAT GIVEN I'M NOT AN ENGINEER
IF I CAN FOLLOW UP ON THAT.
FIRST OF ALL, THE UNCERTAINTY
ABOUT THE LEGAL PRINCIPLES THAT
WOULD APPLY TO EVALUATION I
DON'T THINK ANYONE ON THE TEAM
SEES A PATH TO REDUCE THE
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT THAT SHORT
OF THAT ENTERING THE LEGAL
PROCESS AND HAVING THE
JURISDICTIONAL AUTHORITY SORT
IT OUT THE SECOND ON THE
QUESTION OF IMPROVING
RELIABILITY BECAUSE OF CONCERNS
ABOUT THE RELIABILITY PROBLEMS
AND THE PROJECTED COSTS
PROVIDED BY DETI AND CONSUMERS
FOR ADDRESSING THOSE
RELIABILITY ISSUES, THE PUBLIC
SERVICE COMMISSION HAS
INITIATED AN AUDIT OF THE
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PHYSICAL
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS AND
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT
PROCESSES OF THOSE TWO
UTILITIES BY AN INDEPENDENT
ENGINEERING FIRM.
THAT CONTRACT BEGAN BY MY
RECOLLECTION LATE JULY AND IS
EXPECTED TO PRODUCE RESULTS
NEXT YEAR MIDYEAR.
THAT IS BECAUSE THE COMMISSION
AND THE FOLKS WHO INTERVENED IN
THE CASES ARE NOT PERSUADED
THAT WE HAVE A PROPER
UNDERSTANDING OF WHY WE HAVE
THE RELIABILITY PROBLEMS WE DO
AND THEREFORE WHAT THE COSTS
ARE TO FIX THEM IN THE MOST
COST EFFECTIVE WAY.
THAT AUDIT WILL WILL ALSO
CERTAINLY BE BASED ON SAMPLING.
IT WILL NOT BE A COMPREHENSIVE
DETAILED STUDY OF ANN ARBOR BUT
IT WILL LIKELY BE USEFUL IN
UNDERSTANDING WHAT KINDS
OF THINGS ARE AT THE ROOT
OF THE PROBLEMS AND THEREFORE
WHAT KINDS OF THINGS MIGHT NEED
TO BE DONE HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
SO WHILE THAT IS NOT IMMEDIATE,
IT MAY BE HELPFUL TO WAIT UNTIL
THAT AUDIT IS AVAILABLE AND
TAKE THE LEARNINGS FROM IT AS
THE BASIS FOR ANY FURTHER STUDY
SPECIFIC TO ANN ARBOR.
UNDERSTOOD.
THANK YOU.
I KNOW THAT MR. JONATHAN DR.
STULTS HAD A QUICK AND THEN
CALL A DAY OH I'M SORRY ONE YET
WE'RE PAST TIME.
I SEE NO OBJECTIONS FROM THE
TABLE COUNCILOR, THANK YOU.
APPRECIATE THAT.
SO NOT THE ONE QUESTION I HAVE
IS ON THE AND THE BOTH ONE YEAR
AND TWENTY YEAR FINANCIAL
OUTCOMES IT'S THE AVERAGE KIND
OF RATE AND COSTS.
OK I GET TWO RECOMMENDATIONS
OUT OF OUT OF THE ANALYSIS
WHICH IS MOVE FORWARD WITH NSC
YOU AND AND PURSUE PHASE TWO
OF FEASIBILITY.
DO THESE COSTS FACTOR IN?
OBVIOUSLY WE'RE LOOKING AT
YEARS OUT FOR AN ACTUAL IF WE
WERE TO PURSUE THIS ACTUALLY
ACQUIRING THE ASSETS IF WE WERE
TO MOVE FORWARD WITH IN SITU
AND WE HAVE SUBSTANTIAL ASSETS
AT THAT POINT OBVIOUSLY THE
GOAL WOULD NOT BE TO HAVE TWO
SEPARATE MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
RUNNING AT THE SAME TIME IF WE
WERE TO HAVE CONSIDERABLE
SUCCESS WITH THE SIU WITH THAT
ULTIMATELY IMPACT THE TOTAL
COST OF AN MBA OR THE EVENTUAL
RATES THAT WOULD BE CHARGED
THERE WOULD BE INFRASTRUCTURE
ASSOCIATED WITH YOU WITHIN CITY
OPERATIONS AND ABOUT PHYSICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT COULD BE
REUSED OR APPLIED TO THE MCU SO
THERE'D BE SOME OPERATING COSTS
THAT WOULD BE REDUNDANT AND
COULD AVOID.
BUT THE MAJOR COSTS FOR
ACQUIRING THE ASSETS AND THEN
MANAGING THOSE WOULD NOT BE
SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECTED BY THE
AVAILABILITY OF THE SEIU AND I
DO NOT SEE ANY BARRIER TO
FOLDING THE TWO TOGETHER.
YOU KNOW IF YOU GO DOWN THAT
PATH NO, I TRY TO BE COHERENT.
MY QUESTION FOR YOU IN
CONDUCTING THE ANALYSIS DO YOU
FACTOR A CITY'S GROWTH AT ALL?
AND THE REASON I'M ASKING A
QUESTION THIS CITY HAS MADE AN
INTENTIONAL DECISION TO EMBRACE
GROWTH, TO SEEK DENSIFICATION,
TO ALLOW VERTICAL CONSTRUCTION
TO SEEK LIGHT INDUSTRIAL TO
SEEK MORE COMMERCIALIZATION SO
MORE USERS AND WHEN YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT CAPACITY AND YOU
HAVE WELL, THIS PARTICULAR USE
CAN BE SUPPORTED BY THE CURRENT
GRID CAPACITY, DO YOU FACTOR IN
THE GROWTH OF A COMMUNITY IN
DETERMINING COST OF THE SPREAD
OF COST, THE IMPACT ON THE
SYSTEM IN THE ANALYSIS THAT WE
PRESENT IN THE REPORT WE DID
NOT ASSUME MATERIAL GROWTH
OF THE CITY BUT THE MODELS THAT
WE WILL BE PROVIDING TO YOUR
STAFF MAKE IT POSSIBLE TO DO
THAT SO THE ANSWER CAN BE HAD.
I DON'T HAVE IT FOR YOU SO I
JUST WANTED TO END BY THANKING
THE TEAM FOR THE PRESENTATION
RECONFIRMING THAT THIS IS NOT
STAFF SEGMENTATION.
WE HAVE A LOT OF WORK TO DO
HERE AND THIS IS DENSE.
THIS IS A LOT OF INFORMATION
AND RECOMMENDATIONS ARE HARD TO
TAKE AWAY.
SO TODAY I ASKED AND RECEIVED
FROM THE CONSULTING TEAM A
SUMMARY OF THE ULTIMATE
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE REPORT
AND WE WILL BE TAKING THAT AND
DISTRIBUTING IT TO ALL OF YOU.
SO I JUST WANT TO BE
TRANSPARENT.
THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT I ALSO
KIND OF READ INTO WHAT WHAT IS
BEING SAID HERE.
SO WE WILL GET THAT OUT TO YOU
PER THE CONSULTANTS AGAIN NOT
STAFF RECOMMENDATIONS BUT OUR
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE
CONSULTANTS.
SO I JUST WANTED TO LET YOU
KNOW IF THAT'S FORTHCOMING.
THANK YOU AND THANK YOU FOR YOU
TO YOU AND TO YOU KNOW EVERYONE
BOTH BOTH IN THE ROOM AND IN
THE CLOUD FOR FOR THE WORK DONE
AND GETTING US HERE TO THIS
POINT SO WE CAN WORK AND WORK
ON WHAT TO DO NEXT.
SO THANK ARE WE NOW COME TO TO
PUBLIC COMMENT GENERAL TIME
BECOME A GENERAL TIME IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL IN
THE COMMUNITY THAT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
PUBLIC COMMENT GENERAL TIME ONE
NEED NOT HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE.
SPEAKERS HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE BOTH
IN-HOUSE AND ONLINE PAY CLOSE
ATTENTION TO THE TIME SPEAKERS
WILL BE NOTIFIED WHEN THIRTY
SECONDS ARE REMAINING EITHER BY
THE THE TIMER OR OUR CLERK WHEN
YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC
COMMENT?
PEOPLE DO NOT NEED TO RAISE
THEIR HAND.
IT IS JUST A WALK ON UP TO THE
PODIUM AND WHEN PEOPLE HAVE
STOPPED WALKING THEN WE'LL MOVE
ON TO ONLINE.
BUT UNTIL THEN IS THERE ANYONE
YOU'D LIKE TO SPEAK TO PUBLIC
COMMENT HELLO AND THANK YOU
COUNCIL.
MY NAME IS GREG.
I'M THE PRESIDENT OF THAT
PUBLIC POWER.
I'D LIKE TO THANK YOU ALL FOR
YOUR CARE FOR QUESTIONS AND
CONSIDERATIONS OF THIS REPORT.
FANTASTIC WORK OF THE NEW JET
AND FIVE LAKES TEAM TO PUT IT
TOGETHER I THINK THAT THERE IS
A LOT OF UNCERTAINTY IN THIS
REPORT WHICH IS PRETTY WELL
FELT BY A LOT OF PEOPLE.
HOWEVER, THERE ARE A FEW THINGS
TO COME OUT OF THIS REPORT AND
HONESTLY FROM COMMON SENSE TO A
CERTAIN EXTENT THAT ARE CERTAIN
ONE OF THEM IS THAT WHILE THERE
IS A RANGE OF COST BEING
APPROACH, THERE IS CERTAINLY A
PATH WHERE MUNICIPAL IZATION
WOULD BE THE CHEAPEST OPTION
POSSIBLE FOR US TO REACH ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT RENEWABLE POWER
AND IT IS THE ONLY REALISTIC
PATH WE HAVE TO SIGNIFICANTLY
INCREASE THE RELIABILITY OF OUR
SYSTEM WHILE THE COST
OF RELIABILITY WE'RE NOT
DIRECTLY MODELED IN THIS STUDY.
IT IS FAIR TO SAY THAT
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES GENERALLY
PERFORM BETTER EVEN WITHOUT
SIGNIFICANT AMOUNTS
OF INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT
WATER PARK, FLORIDA IN 2005
WHEN MANY MUNICIPALITIES SAW 20
PERCENT INCREASE IN THEIR
RELIABILITY ON YEAR ONE, THEY
DID DO SOME AMOUNT
OF INVESTMENT IN THEIR
INFRASTRUCTURE.
HOWEVER, THEY LARGELY ATTRIBUTE
THAT TO A LOCAL WORKFORCE THAT
WAS RESPONSIVE TO THE
COMMUNITY'S NEEDS.
FURTHERMORE, THE REPORT DOES
SUGGEST THE CONSTRUCTION OF 10
NEW SUBSTATIONS FOR THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
IT IS UNCLEAR TO ME WHY THEY
DID NOT RECOMMEND THAT THE CITY
ACQUIRE DTD EXISTING
SUBSTATIONS.
HOWEVER, IT IS UNFAIR TO SAY
THAT THE CONSTRUCTION OF 10 NEW
SUBSTATIONS WOULD NOT INCREASE
THE RELIABILITY OF THE SYSTEM
PARTICULARLY IN A SITUATION
WHERE THE TRANSITION FROM A
FOUR POINT EIGHT KILOVOLT
SYSTEM TO THE MODERN THIRTEEN
POINT TWO KILOWATT SYSTEM IS
ONE OF THE LARGEST DRIVING
COSTS IN RELIABILITY
IMPROVEMENTS AND THAT WOULD BE
ACCOMPLISHED THROUGH THE
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW
SUBSTATIONS.
SO THAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED AS
WE'RE MOVING FORWARD AND
LOOKING AT THESE NUMBERS.
ADDITIONALLY, WHILE
MINIATURIZATION MAY OR MAY NOT
BE ACCOMPLISHABLE BY TWENTY
THIRTY, IT IS THE ONLY WAY WE
HAVE TO REACH ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT RENEWABLE POWER WITHOUT
THE PURCHASE OF RECS IS THE
ONLY REAL WAY WE HAVE THREE
PERCENT RENEWABLE POWER.
RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS ARE
NOT THE SAME THING AS USING
RENEWABLE POWER RIGHT.
WE WOULD BE LOCKING IN DIRTY
GENERATION AND IF WE WERE TO
JUST CONTINUE TO BUY RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDITS AND ADDITIONAL
IT IS A RENT VERSUS OWN
SCENARIO WE ARE GOING TO HAVE
TO CONTINUE TO PAY THESE COSTS
OVER TIME.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE COST
OF MUNICIPAL IZATION EVEN IN
THE WORST CASE SCENARIO WHICH I
WOULD VERY MUCH LIKE TO SEE
ANOTHER COMMUNITY THAT HAD THAT
TYPE OF A WORST CASE SCENARIO
BECAUSE I HAVE NOT SEEN ONE
PERSONALLY IN THE THREE YEARS
I'VE SEEN I'VE BEEN ORGANIZING
ON THIS ISSUE.
BUT EVEN IN THAT WORST CASE
SCENARIO AFTER 20 YEARS THE
RATES ARE NEARLY THE SAME ONLY
FOUR PERCENT HIGHER AND THAT
TABLE REALLY SHOULD BE AMENDED
TO SHOW 30 YEAR RATES BECAUSE
THE DEBT THAT THEY ARE
ESTIMATING ON IS 30 YEAR DEBT.
SO IT IS AN INVESTMENT THAT
PAYS FOR ITSELF OVER TIME,
ALLOWS US TO REACH 100 PERCENT
RENEWABLE POWER AND IT IS THE
ONLY REAL WAY THAT WE HAVE TO
ADDRESS THE RELIABILITY
CONCERNS WHICH THE STUDY WHICH
WAS VERY NICE TO BE ABLE TO GET
THAT DATA AND I THINK VERY
HELPFUL FOR SHAPING THE FUTURE
OF THIS CONVERSATION.
CLEARLY INDICATES IS THE
LARGEST CONCERN FOR RESIDENTS
OF ANN ARBOR AND CONCLUSION I
WOULD JUST LIKE TO SAY THAT I
HOPE THAT YOU FOLLOW THE
RECOMMENDATION OF THE STUDY AND
PURSUE A FEASIBILITY STUDY.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI, MY NAME IS BAKER.
I LIVE AT 620 GREEN ROAD ON THE
NORTHEAST SIDE OF ANN ARBOR AND
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL TONIGHT FOR
THE PAST 30 YEARS I HAVE LIVED
ON THE NORTHEAST SIDE OF ANN
ARBOR AND WE'VE ALWAYS HAD POOR
ELECTRICAL RELIABILITY AND IT'S
GETTING WORSE LAST YEAR WE HAD
EIGHT MAJOR POWER FAILURES
SOFTWARE WE HAVE NOW HAS SHOWN
US THAT WE'VE HAD 17 POWER
INTERRUPTIONS SINCE THE
BEGINNING OF THE YEAR ALBEIT
SOME OF OUR SHORT SUMMER DURING
STORM EVENTS AS WE ALL KNOW.
BUT AN INCREASING NUMBER ARE
DUE TO GOOD WEATHER.
WE'VE HAD NUMEROUS CONTACTS
WITH DC AND THE PUBLIC MICHIGAN
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION AND
WE REALLY HAVEN'T HAD ANY
IMPROVEMENT IN RELIABILITY NO
SURPRISE TO ANYBODY HERE AND
LACK OF ELECTRICAL RELIABILITY
IS ONE OF THE HOTTEST TOPICS ON
NEXT DOOR.
THE LACK OF RELIABILITY AS
WE'VE HEARD COST CITY RESIDENTS
COST THE CITY ITSELF.
IT COSTS BUSINESSES MANY
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS.
THERE'S ALSO AN EQUITY FACTOR
HERE TOO BECAUSE PEOPLE
OF MEANS CAN AFFORD TO BUY A
GENERATOR AND USE IT WHILE IF
YOU'RE A LOW INCOME RESIDENT OR
YOU ARE A RENTER, WELL YOU JUST
SUFFER AN ADDITION TO
RELIABILITY AND EQUITY.
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT IS A
PARTNER FOR ANN ARBOR A TWO
ZERO LARGELY BECAUSE THEY'RE A
LARGE SUPPLIER OF NATURAL GAS
TO THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
THE REASON THAT RELIABILITY,
EQUITY AND SUSTAINABILITY GOALS
ARE NOT BEING MET IS THAT THE
BUSINESS MODEL FOR ELECTRICAL
GENERATION AND DISTRIBUTION IN
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN IS BROKEN
.
IF YOU WANT ELECTRICITY YOU
HAVE TO BUY IT FROM DTE YOU
HAVE TO PAY THEIR RATES AND
THEY HAVE A GUARANTEED RETURN
ON THAT AND IF THE SERVICES
UNRELIABLE OR ARE NOT
SUSTAINABLE YOU DON'T HAVE THE
ALTERNATIVE.
THIS IS WHY I'M SO ENTHUSIASTIC
ABOUT THE RESULTS OF THE FIRST
PHASE OF THE STUDY.
IT'S THE FIRST STEP IN
UNDERSTANDING HOW TO CHANGE THE
BUSINESS MODEL SO IT'S MORE
CUSTOMER DRIVEN BY THE GOALS
OF RELIABILITY, AFFORDABILITY,
EQUITY AND SUSTAINABILITY.
I URGE YOU TO SUPPORT THE NEXT
PHASE OF THIS STUDY SO WE CAN
GET A CLEARER PICTURE OF THE
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC
LANDSCAPE SO THAT OUR CITIZENS
CAN POTENTIALLY GET MORE
AFFORDABLE, RELIABLE AND
SUSTAINABLE ELECTRICITY.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND
ATTENTION.
THANK YOU.
HELLO MY NAME IS ZACHARIA AND I
LIVE IN WARD TWO.
I'M HERE TO SPEAK IN FAVOR
OF MUNICIPAL IZATION OF OUR
POWER GRID AND FIRSTLY I WOULD
LIKE TO THANK THE COUNCIL FOR
FUNDING THIS FEASIBILITY STUDY
AND I'M ASKING THAT YOU FOLLOW
THE STUDY'S RECOMMENDATION TO
FUND A PHASE TWO EVALUATIONS.
NOW A BIG PART OF THIS STUDY
INVOLVED EVALUATING THE
POSSIBLE COSTS OF ACQUIRING OUR
GRID FROM DTG BUT FOR A MOMENT
I'D LIKE TO TALK ABOUT THE
COSTS THAT WEREN'T DISCUSSED IN
THIS STUDY THAT'S SOMEWHAT UP
THE ECONOMIC LOSSES DUE TO DTD
INVESTMENT ARE ENORMOUS EVERY
TIME OUR POWER GOES OUT, AS YOU
KNOW, RESIDENTS LOSE FOOD, THEY
LOSE MEDICINE, THEY CAN'T DO
REMOTE WORK AND IN MANY CASES
THEY CAN'T POWER THEIR MEDICAL
DEVICES TO QUOTE STATE SENATOR
,WE ARE ALREADY PAYING FOR DTD
GRID TODAY.
MANY OF THESE COSTS THAT I'M
TALKING ABOUT ARE IMPOSSIBLE TO
QUANTIFY.
HOW DO YOU PUT A PRICE TAG ON
THE MANY SCHOOL DAYS CANCEL
THIS YEAR ALONE DUE TO THE
OUTAGES?
WHAT'S THE VALUE OF A BELOVED
FAMILY PET EVERY YEAR SINCE I
MOVED HERE I'VE SEEN AN ARTICLE
AT LEAST ONE ARTICLE ABOUT PETS
THAT WERE ELECTROCUTED TO DEATH
BY DOWNED DTG LINES AND MOST
IMPORTANTLY WHAT IS THE VALUE
OF A HUMAN LIFE?
I'M NOT JUST TALKING ABOUT THE
MULTIPLE FATALITIES THAT OCCUR
EVERY YEAR BECAUSE OF DISEASE,
GREED AND NEGLIGENCE.
I'M ALSO TALKING ABOUT ADT HAS
REPEATEDLY REPEATEDLY CHOSEN
CLIMATE DENIAL AND GREENWASHING
OVER SERIOUS ACTION AND
CONTINUES TO DO SO.
AND AS YOU KNOW, DTL IS ONE
OF THE DIRTIEST UTILITIES IN
THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
THEY HAVE IN STRANGLING THE
FUTURE OF MY GENERATION FOR
DECADES AND ALL THE WHILE THEY
GREENWASH THE RECORD.
UNFORTUNATELY OFTEN USING
GOVERNMENT PLATFORMS TO DO SO.
I HOPE YOU WOULD AGREE THAT MY
LIFE AND THE LIVES OF THOSE IN
MY GENERATION ARE VERY VALUABLE
AND I'M ASKING YOU NOT TO SHOW
THAT YOU ACTUALLY BELIEVE THIS
NOT JUST THROUGH RHETORIC BUT
THROUGH ACTION.
THE CHOICE BEFORE YOU IS AN
EXTREMELY IMPORTANT ONE.
YOU CAN CHOOSE THE OPTION
OF CLIMATE ACTION.
YOU CAN FOLLOW YOUR
RECOMMENDATION TO SWIFTLY GO
FORWARD WITH A PHASE TWO STUDY
OR YOU CAN CHOOSE THE OPTION
THE POLITICIANS HAVE CHOSEN MY
ENTIRE LIFE AND THAT'S THE
OPTION OF DELAY OF HALF
MEASURES OF APATHY AND
AGNOSTICISM.
I KNOW THAT MY GENERATION
SIMPLY CANNOT AFFORD THAT WE
CANNOT AFFORD ANY MORE OF DTD
DIRTY POWER.
I URGE YOU TO BE CLIMATE
CHAMPIONS IN THIS MOMENT AND
FOLLOW THE STUDY'S
RECOMMENDATION TO SUPPORT THE
ESSAY.
YOU QUICKLY FIND A PLACE TO
STUDY AND SUPPORT FOR PUBLIC
POWER.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HI MY NAME IS SYDNEY ALTHOFF
AND I'M UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
I JUST WANT TO COME TO YOU
TODAY AND SAY THAT IF YOU'RE
WARY OF PUBLIC POWER BECAUSE
OF THE 20 30 GOAL YOU ARE
STALLING.
WE'RE TIRED OF HEARING ABOUT
GOALS WITHOUT ANY REAL ACTION.
WE HAVE THE TWENTY THIRTY
NUMBER OVER AND OVER AND OVER.
I HEAR THE AVERAGE GOALS OVER
AND OVER WHAT'S BEING DONE TO
GET US THERE.
WE EITHER SIT HERE AND DO
NOTHING OR WE MOVE FORWARD WITH
MUNICIPAL POWER.
AS A STUDENT AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN I SUPPORT THE
EQUALIZATION OF THE POWER IN
ANN ARBOR WE ARE HIT EVEN
HARDER AS STUDENTS BECAUSE AS
WE SAW WITH THE GEO STRIKES
,
STUDENTS ARE FOOD INSECURE,
BARELY AFFORDING RENTS AND A
SEEMINGLY SMALL CLASS IS AN
EVEN BIGGER PROPORTION OF OUR
LIMITED INCOME AND LIMITED
ABILITY TO WORK.
I'M TRYING TO GET A DEGREE
STUDY AND FIND A JOB NOT WORRY
ABOUT LOSING MY HOUSING AND
FOOD EVERY TIME THE POWER GOES
OUT.
SO TAKE A STANCE AND CHOOSE IT
NOW AND MOVE FORWARD WITH NO
PUBLIC POWER.
HI MY NAME IS LISA.
I'M A PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP
RESIDENT, FORMER AND RESIDENT
FOR OVER TWENTY FIVE YEARS.
I JUST LEFT THE CITY TWO YEARS
AGO A FEW POINTS BEFORE I MAKE
MY STATEMENT WERE THE FIRST SIX
CITIES TO ACTUALLY ACHIEVE ONE
PERCENT.
RENEWABLES DID SO WITH PUBLIC
POWER.
IT'S A PROVEN WAY TO ACHIEVE
THE ULTIMATE GOAL WE'RE SEEKING
SECOND POINT AS COUNCIL HAS
SPOKEN UP IN THE PAST AGAINST
RACIST CORPORATIONS EVEN LED
RALLIES THAT WE ALL
PARTICIPATED IN I JUST TO NOT
PICK AND CHOOSE WHO IS A BAD
ACTOR I CALL THEM ALL OUT AND
MY THIRD POINT IS TO ANOTHER
COUNCILMAN POINT OF NON PROFIT
BEARING THE COST IS THAT FEMA
RULES ALLOW FOR THE
DISTRIBUTION AND ALLOCATION
OF FUNDS TO MUNICIPAL
UTILITIES.
THEY DO NOT ALLOCATE FUNDS
TOWARDS NOT MUNICIPAL
UTILITIES.
SO IF WE PROCEED AND HAVE
MUNICIPAL UTILITY, FEMA MONEY
WOULD BE THERE FOR US ON THE
TABLE TO ACCOUNT FOR SOME
OF THOSE LOSSES.
SO THAT COULD COUNTER SOME
OF THE POINTS OF THE COST THAT
EVERYBODY'S BRINGING UP.
AND NOW HERE'S MY STATEMENT IN
TWENTY TWELVE I RECEIVE
SHERRATT FOR TAXES FROM DC.
WE HAD TWO KIDS, FIVE JOBS AND
LIVED IN A RENTAL THE OUTSIDE
YOU KNOW IT'S A SHUT OFF NOTICE
WHEN THERE WAS A RED ACROSS THE
TOP OF THE PAPER THERE USED TO
BE A DTM PERSON PAYMENT CENTER
AT GLENCOE CROSSING ON A FRIDAY
AT FOUR FORTY FIVE THE LINE WAS
OUT THE DOOR.
PEOPLE WERE THERE WAITING IN
LINE BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T WANT
THEIR POWER SHUT ON FRIDAY
BECAUSE THEY NEEDED TO GET
THROUGH THE WEEKEND.
THE SAME PRACTICES STILL OCCUR
TODAY.
EVERYTHING IS AUTOMATED SO YOU
DON'T SEE THAT LINE BUT THAT
LINE STILL EXIST AND IT'S STILL
OUT.
THE DOOR IS ONE OF THE ONLY
UTILITIES TO SEND CUSTOMERS TO
COLLECTION AGENCIES.
WE DID SO TO ME AND MY FAMILY.
THEY DID SO COVID LOCKED UP AND
THEY ARE SENDING CUSTOMERS TO
COLLECTION AGENCIES TODAY I
WATCHED ON SOCIAL MEDIA DURING
COVID LOCKDOWN I SAW PEOPLE
CROWD FUNDING OUT OF THE
GOODNESS OF THEIR HEARTS TO PAY
FOR PEOPLE'S ELECTRIC BILLS
THAT THEY HAD NEVER MET BEFORE
.
THEY CAN PUT UP BANNERS AT THE
BIG HOUSE THEY ARE RIVERS AND
THEY CAN EVEN GIVE AWAY
BACKPACKS TO OUR KIDS AT SCHOOL
BARBECUES BUT THEY WILL NOT
GUARANTEE THAT THEY WILL NOT
SHUT OFF ELECTRICITY IF A
PUBLIC UTILITY WE CAN BUILD IT,
WE CAN ON IT, WE CAN DECIDE.
PLEASE PROCEED WITH THE PHASE
TWO STUDY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
MUNICIPAL CAUSATION IS
ABSOLUTELY FEASIBLE.
LET'S GET A REALISTIC COST
ESTIMATE AND LET ANY UTILITY
SHUTOFFS THANK YOU
.
THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS JOSHUA JACOBSEN.
I'M A RESIDENT OF THE FIFTH
WARD OF ANN ARBOR AND I'D LIKE
TO THANK THE COUNCIL FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK TODAY AS
WELL AS EVERYONE WHO'S OUT IN
SUPPORT OF REDUCING GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS.
I BELIEVE THAT'S THE MOST
IMPORTANT ISSUE OF OUR TIME AND
I THINK THERE'S LOTS
OF INTERESTING IDEAS AND
POSSIBILITIES AS A PART OF THAT
STUDY.
BUT I'D LIKE TO TOUCH ON ONE
KEY PIECE THAT THE STUDY SAID
IT COULD NOT EVALUATE AND
THAT'S RESILIENCE.
RESILIENCE WAS RATED THE NUMBER
ONE ISSUE IN OUR COMMUNITY AS
WE SAW EARLIER TODAY.
AND IF YOU TAKE A WALK THROUGH
ANN ARBOR LIKE I HAVE DURING
THE COURSE OF WHEN ONE OF OUR
MANY RECENT POWER OUTAGES
YOU'LL NOTICE A CONSTANT LOW
FREQUENCY HUM OF THOUSANDS
OF GAS POWER GENERATORS RUNNING
THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
WE'RE BURNING FOSSIL FUELS IN
OUR OWN BACKYARDS AND I THINK
THAT'S CONTRARY TO OUR GOALS AS
A PART OF H0 AND PREVENTS US
FROM GETTING TO 100 PERCENT
RENEWABLE ENERGY BY 20 30 THAT
ALSO REPRESENTS AN ADDITIONAL
EXPENSE FOR MEMBERS OF THE
COMMUNITY WHO CAN'T AFFORD TO
OWN AND OPERATE A GENERATOR AND
IT GOES AGAINST THE EIGHT TO
ZERO CRITERIA OF EQUITY FOR
THOSE WHO CAN'T FIND A METER
PHOTOVOLTAIC AND BATTERY
STORAGE AND THAT'S YOU DECREASE
OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT IN THE
EVENT OF RELIABILITY OUTAGES.
BUT STILL FUNDAMENTALLY AN
INDIVIDUAL SOLUTION TO WHAT IS
A COMMUNITY PROBLEM AND IT
DOESN'T HELP WITH THE COST IN
THAT INSTANCE IN MY VIEW
THERE'S ONLY ONE SOLUTION FOR
RELIABILITY AND THAT'S
MUNICIPAL IZATION ACCORDING TO
THE STUDY ON PAGE ONE FIFTY
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS IT HAS
THE BEST LONG TERM POTENTIAL
FOR WHAT WE NEED IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
IT REMOVES DTT FROM EVERY
DECISION THAT WE'RE MAKING
GOING FORWARD WITH REGARD TO
THE CLIMATE AND THAT AFFECTS US
IN NUMEROUS WAYS.
IT GETS RID OF AN ENTITY THAT'S
CONCERNED ONLY WITH PROFIT.
I'M GOING TO SAY THAT IS EVIL
OR THAT THE PEOPLE THAT WORK
THERE ARE BAD BUT THEY HAVE A
FIDUCIARY DUTY TO THEIR
SHAREHOLDERS AND THEY ARE
LEGALLY RESPONSIBLE TO ACT IN
THE INTERESTS OF PROFIT.
AT EVERY TIME WE'VE SEEN HOW
THIS PLAYS OUT THEY'VE LOBBIED
AGAINST NET METERING.
THEY KNOWINGLY SLOWED SOLAR
ADOPTION BY DECREASING THE
AMOUNT THAT PEOPLE WERE GETTING
PAID FOR SOLAR INSTALLATIONS
AND THEY FRAMED IT AS A SOLAR
VERSUS NON SOLAR HOUSEHOLDS.
AND WHO IS SUBSIDIZING WHO THAT
MONEY COULD HAVE CAME OUT
OF THE SIX BILLION DOLLARS
OF PROFIT THAT TOOK LAST YEAR.
THAT'S NOT NEED TO BE DEBATED
BETWEEN WHO HAS SOLD ON ROOFS
AND WHO DOESN'T.
I KNOW THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE
AGREE AND SUPPORT THE IDEA
OF MUNICIPAL CAUSATION BUT MAY
HAVE SOME RESERVATIONS ABOUT IT
BEING A QUOTE RISKY PATHWAY.
BUT I WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT
THERE'S SUBSTANTIAL RISKS WITH
EVERY PLAN THAT WE HAVE IN
MOTION AT THIS POINT,
ESPECIALLY WITH BUSINESS AS
USUAL, ITS PLAN IS SLOW AND
IT'S OVERLY DEPENDENT ON
NATURAL GAS WHICH IS STILL A
FOSSIL FUEL DESPITE WHAT THEIR
MARKETING MIGHT CLAIM.
AND THE BUSINESS AS USUAL MODEL
DEPENDS ON D.T. DOING THEIR
BEST TO STAY WITH THEIR CLIMATE
INITIATIVES WHICH WE KNOW THEY
HAVE HAD TROUBLE DOING IN THE
PAST MICROBEADS, COMMUNITY
SOLAR AND YOU ARE ALL GREAT
IDEAS AND ARE AN IMPORTANT
FIRST STEP IN DOING THIS
TRANSITION.
BUT THEY HAVE SOME UNCERTAIN
LEGALITIES AND WILL REQUIRE
FIGHTS AT THE STATE LEVEL AND
THERE'S ALSO ONE COMMON MODEL
THERE.
IN CONCLUSION, PLEASE FOLLOW
THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
FEASIBILITY STUDY AND
COMMISSION PHASE TWO.
THANK YOU.
THAT EVENING MAYOR AND COUNCIL
THANK YOU FOR ALL THE WORK
THAT'S GOTTEN US TO HERE AND
NOW LET US BOLDLY GO FORTH ON
THE NEXT STEPS.
MY NAME IS DR. LAWRENCE
SARGENT.
I'M A THIRD WARD RESIDENT AND A
CO-FOUNDER OF WASHTENAW THREE
FIFTY ONE OF THE ORIGINAL
PARTNERS THE EIGHT TWO ZERO
PLAN CAME FOR CLIMATE STAYING
FOR EQUITY, JUSTICE AND A
FUTURE.
THE FEASIBILITY STUDY AND
RELATED OPTIONS ANALYSIS THAT
YOU ARE GOING TO BE EXAMINING
IN THE WEEKS AHEAD ARE LARGELY
LOOKING AT COSTS AND RATES.
WHAT IS NOT EXAMINED IS THE
MOUNTING COSTS OF UNRELIABLE
ELECTRICITY THAT WE'VE ALL BEEN
EXPERIENCING WITH GREATER
FREQUENCY.
SOME OF THESE COSTS ARE DIRECT
AND PAINFUL LAST FOOD AND
MEDICINE, DAMAGED APPLIANCES,
IMPAIRED ABILITY TO WORK FROM
HOME, TREMENDOUS STRAIN ON
RESIDENTS WITH MEDICAL NEEDS
DISABILITIES INABILITY TO POP
OR STORE MILK, DIFFICULTY
CARING FOR PETS CANCELED SCHOOL
WHEN SO MANY CHILDREN ARE STILL
TRYING TO MAKE UP FOR THE
PANDEMIC RELATED CHALLENGES
THAT'S JUST TO NAME A FEW.
HOW MANY HAVE PURCHASED GAS
GENERATORS WHICH TAKE US
BACKWARD ON OUR EIGHT TO ZERO
GOAL OF ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
RENEWABLE ENERGY?
THEN THERE THE PSYCHIC COST HOW
MANY OF YOU HAVE POWER OUTAGE
PTSD FOR EVERY STORM OR A
BREEZE WILL RESULT IN YET
ANOTHER PROLONGED POWER OUTAGE?
RAISE YOUR HAND.
I HOPE THAT IN EVALUATING THE
STUDIES BY FIVE NEW GEN YOU
WILL BOTH CAREFULLY WEIGH THE
FINDINGS IN THESE REPORTS AND
ALSO CONSIDER THE INCREASINGLY
CLEAR IMPERATIVE TO FACE THE
WORSENING DTT RELIABILITY
CRISIS IF WE'RE GOING TO AVOID
THE WORST RAVAGES OF THE
CLIMATE CRISIS THAT IS BEARING
DOWN ON US, WE MUST ELECTRIFY
EVERYTHING AND POWER IT WITH
RENEWABLES AND EFFICIENCY A
RELIABLE, MODERNIZED AND WELL
MAINTAINED DISTRIBUTION GRID IS
FUNDAMENTAL TO THIS PROJECT.
DTT IN THE MEANTIME HAS BRAG TO
THEIR SHAREHOLDERS THAT THEY
SAVED CLOSE TO A BILLION
DOLLARS IN DEFERRED
MAINTENANCE.
WE'VE SEEN THAT DUE.
HE IS NOT UP TO THE TASK THEY
PRIVILEGE THEIR FIDUCIARY
RESPONSIBILITY TO SHAREHOLDERS
OVER SUPPLYING RELIABLE AND
AFFORDABLE ELECTRICITY AND HAVE
NO PLANS TO MEET OUR TWO ZERO
GOALS IN REAL TERMS FAILING TO
FIX THE DISTRIBUTION
INFRASTRUCTURE IS NOT AN OPTION
.
I URGE YOU TO TAKE THE NEXT
STEP THAT'S RECOMMENDED IN THE
REPORT BEFORE YOU GET AN
APPRAISAL.
DUTY HAS BEEN A BAD LANDLORD.
WE CAN BUY THE HOUSE ON A 30
YEAR BOND, FIX THE AND THE
PLUMBING AND ALL THE NICE PLACE
INSTEAD OF PAYING EVER
INCREASING RENT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
MY NAME IS DONNALLY.
I'M THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF ANN ARBOR FOR PUBLIC POWER
AND I JUST WANT THANK YOU ALL
FOR YOUR WORK ON THIS
FEASIBILITY STUDY AND GETTING
US TO THE POINT WHERE WE ARE
NOW THERE SOME SPECIFIC
EMISSIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS IN
THE STUDY THAT CAUSED ME TO
TAKE PAUSE AS THEY REPRESENT
THE MOST POWERFUL TOOLS
OF MUNICIPAL UTILITY HAS AN
ACCELERATING DECARBONIZATION.
THE FIRST IS THE EMISSION
OF THE BEHIND THE METER SOLAR
GROWTH WHICH WAS NOT MODELED ON
THE INDISPOSITION CALCULUS.
THE SECOND IS THE ASSUMPTION
THAT COMMUNITY SOLAR IS LESS
COST EFFECTIVE AND LESS
EQUITABLE THAN DTD OFFERING A
VOLUNTARY GREEN PRICING
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS MY GREEN
POWER.
THE FOLLOWING CAN OCCUR ON DAY
ONE OF MUNICIPAL ZATION.
THE COMMUNITY CAN DECIDE WHERE
AND HOW MUCH RENEWABLE ENERGY
IS DEPLOYED
.
RESIDENTS AND BUSINESS OWNERS
WILL BE EMPOWERED TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF GENEROUS FEDERAL
INCENTIVES TO INVEST IN SYSTEMS
THAT CAN MEET THEIR LOW DEMANDS
WITHOUT LIMITS AND HAVE THE
FREEDOM TO PRODUCE SURPLUS
ENERGY AND ARBER WILL MAKE THE
RULES ABOUT FAIR COMPENSATION
FOR SURPLUS ENERGY ENERGY
ENDING THE UNFAIR COMPETITIVE
PRACTICES OF GTE WHILE
BOLSTERING THE DEVELOPMENT OF A
RESILIENT RENEWABLE COMMUNITY
OWNED ENERGY SYSTEM WHILE
COMMUNITY SOLAR IS NOT LEGAL
UNDER MICHIGAN LAW WITHIN IOU
TO WITHIN TERRITORIES AND I YOU
CAN CONTRACT AND BUILD AS MUCH
COMMUNITY SOLAR SPACE PROVIDES
WITHOUT THE NEED FOR ANY THIRD
PARTY OWNERSHIP BECAUSE THE
COMMUNITY OWNS UTILITY AND THE
UTILITY RUNS THE BUSINESS THE
CITY CAN SET ITS INSURING THOSE
WITHOUT THEIR OWN ROOFS THOSE
WHO ARE ECONOMICALLY VULNERABLE
,THOSE FACING OTHER OBSTACLES
CAN ENJOY THE BENEFITS
OF AFFORDABLE RENEWABLE ENERGY
.
WELL THE REVENUE FROM
RATEPAYERS HAS RETURNED TO THE
UTILITY.
THE COMMUNITY CAN PRIORITIZE
WHERE INVESTMENT IN ELECTRICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE IS MADE
IMMEDIATELY ADDRESSING
RELIABILITY CONCERNS IN THE
FIRST MUNICIPAL WINTER PARK,
FLORIDA THEY REDUCE OUTAGES BY
20 PERCENT AND FREQUENCY BY 80
PERCENT WITH TARGETED
INVESTMENT DTD POOR PERFORMANCE
IS SUBSIDIZED BY RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES WHO HAVE SPENT
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS DOLLARS
ON FOSSIL BACK FOSSIL BASED
BACKUP GENERATORS TAKING THE
EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN BACKWARDS
LOSS FOOD AND MEDICINE DAMAGED
AND DESTROYED ELECTRONICS LOSS
OF INCOME, BUSINESS REVENUE AND
POWER THEY PAY FOR NEVER
RECEIVED.
THERE'S NO ACCOUNTABILITY FOR
THESE THINGS FROM THE LIMITING
FACTOR OF SPEED AND THE
LIMITATIONS OF 20 OF THE TWENTY
THIRTY TIME FRAMES DO NOT ALLOW
FOR THE REALIZATION OF THE MOST
JUST AND EQUITABLE SOLUTIONS.
IT DOES NOT ACCOMPLISH
DECARBONIZATION GOALS IN A
MEANINGFUL WAY MEANING THE
DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
CAPACITY RATHER THAN USE
OF COSTLY WREX, BPAS AND OTHER
ACCOUNTING SCHEMES.
NOR DOES IT SERVE THE PUBLIC
INTEREST AS EXPRESSED IN THE
SURVEY CONDUCTED BY THE CITY
SPECIFIC CONSIDERING THE STUDY
DOES NOT ADDRESS RELIABILITY, I
SUPPORT THE STUDY FINDINGS THAT
THE CITY SHOULD PURSUE THE
SECOND PHASE OF THE STUDY I
WOULD ADD WITH RIGOR AND
IMMEDIACY TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
THE OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO
ADDRESS THE COMMUNITY'S STATED
PRIORITIES.
IT MAY ALSO BE BENEFICIAL FOR
THE STUDY OF THE TO BE
DECOUPLED FROM DECARBONIZATION
GOALS AS SUGGESTED IN THE
STUDIES EXCUSE ME IF THOSE
GOALS CONTINUE TO BE MEASURED
WITHIN THESE NARROW PARAMETERS
GIVEN THE RECORD OF USE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY, I WOULD ARGUE THAT
THE MOST REALISTIC LONG TERM
PATH TO ACHIEVING JUST AND
EQUITABLE OUTCOMES AND
DECARBONIZATION IS MUNICIPAL
ZATION.
THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE YOU HEARING THESE
PERSPECTIVES AND I HOPE THAT
YOU WILL SUPPORT THE PHASE TWO
STUDY.
THANKS.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS DANIEL BURNHAM
CARTER.
I CURRENTLY LIVE IN THAT
TOWNSHIP BUT I LOVE IT AND I'VE
LIVED IN THE CITY FOR MUCH
OF THE LAST FIFTEEN YEARS.
THERE ARE LOTS OF REASONS TO
SUPPORT PUBLIC POWER.
I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT JUST FROM MY OWN
EXPERIENCE AS SOMEONE WITH
ASTHMA ABOUT AN AIR QUALITY AND
PUBLIC HEALTH ONES.
AS YOU MIGHT KNOW, DC IS ONE
OF THE WORST POLLUTERS IN THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY.
IT HAS AN F GRADE FROM THE
SIERRA CLUB THE PEOPLE WHO
OFTEN SUFFER THE MOST BECAUSE
THE DTG ARE PEOPLE IN DETROIT
AND DOWN RIVER COMMUNITIES WHO
EXPERIENCE A LOT OF THE IMPACTS
OF AIR QUALITY PROBLEMS ON TOP
OF ALL THE OTHER CHALLENGES
THAT DISPROPORTIONATELY LOW
INCOME PEOPLE ALREADY FACE.
WELL I'M GLAD THAT DDE
UNDERPRESSURE IS GOING TO BE
MOVING AWAY FROM COAL IN THE
NEXT ALMOST A DECADE FROM NOW.
UNFORTUNATELY THEY'RE JUST
MOVING FROM ONE FOSSIL FUEL
PRIMARILY TO ANOTHER.
MOVING FROM COAL TO GAS IS
EXCHANGING ONE SET OF PROBLEMS
FOR ANOTHER SET OF PROBLEMS.
A LOT OF GAS COMES FROM
FRACKING FRACKING HAS HARMFUL
EFFECTS ON AIR QUALITY WATER
QUALITY.
A STUDY RECENTLY CAME OUT
SHOWING THAT CHILDREN WHO LIVE
NEAR FRACKING HAVE HIGHER RATES
OF LEUKEMIA.
SO THIS IS NOT A LONG TERM
SOLUTION FOR US.
OUR UTILITY BILLS SHOULD NOT GO
TOWARDS THIS SORT OF ACTIVITY.
SOLELY RELYING ON RENEWABLE
ENERGY CREDITS IS A MISSED
OPPORTUNITY TO ACTUALLY DISRUPT
DTD CORRUPT POWER.
OFTENTIMES PEOPLE FEEL HELPLESS
AT OUR DAY AND AGE BECAUSE WE
SEE GIANT CORPORATIONS GETTING
AWAY WITH SO MUCH HARM TO OUR
EARTH, TO OUR HEALTH, TO OUR
LIVES AND I BELIEVE THE NRA HAS
A GREAT OPPORTUNITY TO PROVE
THE CYNICS WRONG TO PROVE THAT
ACTUALLY THE PEOPLE CAN WIN
BACK THE
.
HELLO MY NAME IS BRENDAN
IRELAND.
I'M NOT ENGINEERING MAJOR AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
I'M STUDYING POWER SYSTEMS AND
I'M GOING TO WORK RENEWABLE
ENERGY SO I THOUGHT I'D JUST
GIVE SOME THOUGHTS ABOUT THE
PRESENTATION TO STUDY.
THE FIRST THING I WANTED TO
TALK ABOUT WAS JUST LIKE WHAT
IT MEANS TO HAVE A RESILIENT
POWER SYSTEM AND THEN THE MAIN
IMPORTANT PART OF THAT IS LIKE
THE REDUNDANT INFRASTRUCTURE
HAVING A REDUNDANT DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM SO THAT WHEN ONE LINE
FAILS OTHER LINES CAN BE IN
PLACE SO THAT IT DOESN'T
ACTUALLY RESULT IN AN OUTAGE
LIKE A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE
MENTIONED RESPONSIBILITY TO ITS
SHAREHOLDERS TO DO IT MEANS IT
DOESN'T WANT TO CUT INTO THOSE
AND INCREASE THE OVERHEAD COSTS
IN ORDER TO BUILD THE
INFRASTRUCTURE AND OUR OWNS AND
OPERATES THE TRANSMISSION LINES
IT CAN MAKE THOSE UPGRADES TO
INCREASE REDUNDANCY AND REDUCE
THE POSSIBILITY OF AN OUTAGE
ESPECIALLY AS LARGE STORMS LIKE
THE ONE THAT HAPPENED JUST A
MONTH AGO WILL INCREASE OVER
THE NEXT FEW DECADES.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO PLAN FOR THAT
.
THE SECOND THING IS UP TO THE
INFRASTRUCTURE.
IT'S NO SECRET THAT YOU'RE SLOW
TO REPLACE INFRASTRUCTURE THAT
AGES THERE CUT LOTS OF FOLKS
THAT HAVE A FEW YEARS AGO AND
YOU KNOW, BECAUSE THAT ALSO
INCREASES OVERHEAD AND IMPACTS
THEIR PROFITS WHEN YOU HAVE A
UTILITY THAT IS OWN OPERATED
AND WORKED BY THE PEOPLE WHO
LIVE WITHIN THE CITY, IT CAN
MORE EFFECTIVELY IDENTIFY
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT IS AGING IN
REPAIR.
IF SOMEONE JUST SEES A LINE
THAT'S ABOUT TO FALL LIKE IN
ANN ARBOR, YOU KNOW, THEY GET
WEIGHED DOWN BY THOSE ALL THOSE
SHOES AND THEY CAN IDENTIFY
THAT AND ADEQUATELY MOBILIZE TO
REPLACE IT AND YOU NEED A
CENTRALIZED GRID OBVIOUSLY THAT
SIU DOES A LOT OF DISTRIBUTED
RESOURCES WHICH IS WHICH IS
GREAT THAT IT'S BUILDING BUT
YOU HAVE TO UPDATE THE
TRANSMISSION INFRASTRUCTURE IF
YOU'RE GOING TO INTEGRATE THOSE
THINGS AS I'M SURE YOU ALREADY
KNOW, POWER WAS MADE TO FLOW
ONE WAY IN A GRID.
SO YOU HAVE TO DO A LOT
OF UPGRADES IN ORDER TO GET
THAT BACK AND FORTH FLOW AND
IT'S THE SYSTEMS AS THEY'RE
BUILT REALLY AREN'T AREN'T
DESIGNED FOR AN EFFECTIVE
DISTRIBUTION OF RESOURCES
SPREAD OUT AROUND AROUND HOMES
.
SO THERE'S A REASON THAT DC HAS
THAT THAT CILACAP THAT CILACAP.
RIGHT.
IT'S BECAUSE THEY KNOW THAT
ONLY UP UPDATE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IF THEY PROMOTE
PEOPLE FROM INCREASING
DECREASING THEIR SOLAR HOMES.
SO WHEN YOU OPERATE AND OWN THE
INFRASTRUCTURE WE CAN MORE
EFFECTIVELY BUILD THOSE UP BY
NEXT.
DON'T INCREASE RESILIENCY.
CREATING ICU OBVIOUSLY HELPS
BUT IF YOU'RE NOT ACTUALLY
OWNING AND OPERATING THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE YOU'RE NOT GOING
TO BE ABLE TO MAKE THIS
EFFICIENT UPGRADES.
PLEASE FUND THE NEXT PHASE THIS
STUDY AND PURSUE MINERALIZATION
.
THANK YOU
HI, I'M DAVID ROUSCH, AN
UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
BUT BEFORE THAT I LIVED AND
WORKED FOR MY WHOLE LIFE SO
I'VE BEEN UNDER THIS RULE
DURING THAT ENTIRE DURATION AND
REALLY WHAT I THINK ABOUT THIS
ISSUE EVEN BEYOND THE NEXT
TWENTY YEAR TIME FRAME AND BE
ON RENEWABLE ENERGY AND RELATED
TO ALL THOSE CALLS TO ME IT
SIMPLY COMES DOWN TO WHO IS
ABLE TO BETTER SERVE THE
COMMUNITY INTEREST.
IS IT GOING TO BE A LOCAL
ENTITY THAT IS STAFFED AND HAS
THE EMPLOYEES FROM THEIR OWN
COMMUNITY AND WHO HAVE LIVED IN
THE CITY AND LOVE THE CITY AND
CARE ABOUT ITS GOALS OR IS IT
GOING TO BE A STATE SANCTIONED
CORPORATE MONOPOLY THAT HAS TO
ANSWER TO THEIR SHAREHOLDERS
AND WHO CARES ABOUT PROFITS AND
THEN SOMETHING THAT REALLY
COMES TO MIND LATELY SINCE I'VE
MOVED TO A MONTH AGO I'VE
PROBABLY SEEN LIKE TWENTY TO
THIRTY ADS.
IT'S CRAZY TO ME THAT IS
ACTIVELY SPENDING OUR TAX MONEY
TO CONVINCE US THAT TO CONVINCE
US THAT WE DON'T NEED CONTROL
OF OUR OWN LOCAL ISSUES AND TO
BE ABLE TO ACHIEVE OUR
STRATEGIC GOALS AND OUR DESIRES
AND AMBITIONS AND HOW WE WANT
TO DO ANYTHING RELATED TO OUR
POWER.
SO I THINK EVEN BEYOND THE FORM
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY IS
ESSENTIAL TO PURSUE A
CIVILIZATION LIKE
HI MY NAME IS
TONIGHT HOSKEN I'M A FIRST YEAR
UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
I'M ACTUALLY ORIGINALLY FROM
AUSTIN, TEXAS.
I WAS LIVING THERE IN THE EARLY
MONTHS OF TWENTY TWENTY ONE
WHEN MY CITY AND STATE
EXPERIENCED THE INCREDIBLY
SUDDEN AND DANGEROUS STORM IN
FEBRUARY AND THIS STORM IS A
DIRECT CONSEQUENCE OF CLIMATE
CHANGE AND IT WILL ONLY GET
WORSE FROM NOW ON.
DURING THE STORM I WATCHED AS
MY FAMILY AND OTHER FAMILIES IN
MY NEIGHBORHOOD AND AROUND THE
STATE EXPERIENCED REALLY LONG
ALMOST SIX DAY LONG POWER
OUTAGES AND OUTAGES DUE TO THE
FACT THAT THE TEXAS GRID IS
PRIVATELY OWNED AND THEREFORE
GROSSLY UNREGULATED AND
UNRELIABLE.
I ALSO AS POLITICIANS IN OUR
STATE FLEW OUR KIDS TO FLORIDA
AND DIDN'T EVEN CARE ABOUT THE
LIVES OF THEIR CITIZENS AND
CERTAINLY I WOULD HATE TO SEE
THE ELECTED OFFICIALS AND THE
CITIZENS OF ANN ARBOR SUFFER
THE SAME CONSEQUENCES IN THIS
NEW CITY THAT I AM NOW A MEMBER
OF A PROUD COMMUNITY MEMBER
OF .
AND FOR THAT REASON I STRONGLY
URGE YOU TO TAKE THE NEXT STEPS
TOWARD MISS MUNICIPAL
ASSOCIATION THE POWER TO CREATE
A BETTER FUTURE FOR MY
GENERATION AND FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS IS IN YOUR HANDS.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
CATHY GRISWOLD, FORMER COUNCIL
MEMBER AND MEMBER OF A TWO TWO
I HOPE YOU'VE BEEN IMPRESSED
TONIGHT BY THE PASSION AND THE
EXPERTIZE OF SPEAKERS FROM A
TUPPY TO YOUNG PEOPLE PEOPLE MY
AGE AND MANY OTHERS.
IT WAS VERY IMPRESSIVE SO I'M
NOT GOING TO TAKE A LOT OF TIME
BECAUSE MOST OF IT'S ALREADY
BEEN SAID.
BUT WHAT I WANT TO POINT OUT IS
THAT THIS IS A VERY COMPLEX
PROBLEM AND THAT HAS BEEN
STATED BY SOME COUNCIL MEMBERS
TONIGHT.
BUT WE HAVE LEADERS WHO ARE
EXPERTS IN THIS FIELD WHO
SUPPORT A TUPPY TO USE ROBBIE,
A FORMER STATE REPRESENTATIVE
JEFF IRWIN, STATE SENATOR FOR
THE 15TH DISTRICT, MICHELLE
DIETRICK FOUNDER AND CHAIR
OF THE DNC CLIM COUNCIL.
WE CAN LOOK TO THESE PEOPLE FOR
LEADERSHIP AND FOR HELP IN
FINDING A SOLUTION FOR ANN
ARBOR.
AND I JUST WANT TO SAY THAT I
WORK DIRECTLY WITH YUSUF ROPY
AND JEFF IRWIN WHEN THE CITY
STRUGGLED TO GET RAPID
RECTANGULAR FLASHING BEACONS ON
HERE ON YOUR FINGER WHICH WAS
THE SITE OF A CRITICAL INJURY
ACCIDENT, IT WAS ALSO THE SITE
OF VERY UNRELIABLE DTG STREET
LIGHTS IN THAT AREA THAT
CONTRIBUTED SIGNIFICANTLY TO
THE CRASH.
BUT IT WAS DUCEPPE, ROBBIE AND
JENNIFER ONE THAT WORKED WITH
MS.
AT AN EXPEDITED THAT SOLUTION
AND I WOULD SEE THEM WORKING
WITH THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR TO
FIND A SOLUTION FOR OUR CLIMATE
CRISIS.
THANK YOU.
HI, I'M JULIA.
GOOD.
I'M A RENTER IN THE OLD WEST
SIDE.
GOT A DUMP DETI IT HAS ALWAYS
BEEN HARD TO BE A RENTER IN ANN
ARBOR.
I MEAN YOU GO BACK THROUGH
HISTORY THERE'S NOT ENOUGH
HOUSING.
THE HOUSING THERE IS IS AND
KEPT IN GOOD SHAPE AND IT'S TOO
EXPENSIVE.
DTD UNRELIABILITY IS JUST
MAKING IT SO MUCH HARDER TO BE
A TENANT HERE.
FAMILY BEHIND ME HAS GOT A
GENERATOR WHICH IS HORRIBLE.
IT'S LIKE A MACK TRUCK PARKED
ON MY BACK.
IT'S BAD ENOUGH BEING IN THE
DARK BUT I'VE GOT THIS THING
RUNNING BUT THE COUPLE ACROSS
THE STREET CAN'T GET A
GENERATOR TO KEEP THEIR
MEDICINE HOLD BECAUSE THEY'RE
TENANTS AND THE RENT FAMILY ON
THE OTHER SIDE DOESN'T HAVE THE
OPTION EITHER NOR DO THEY HAVE
THE OPTION OF TRYING TO GO
SLIGHTLY OFF GRID WITH THEIR
OWN SOLAR PANELS BECAUSE
THEY'RE RENTERS.
SO THEY CAN'T DO THAT AND THE
YOU KNOW, THE LOSS AS A WHOLE
VENTERS IN THE CITY DO HAVE
LESS MONEY.
IT'S GREATER HIT WHEN YOU LOSE
A REFRIGERATOR FULL OF FOOD
THAN IT IS FOR SOMEBODY A
HOMEOWNER.
I DON'T SEE ANY JOINT PLAN WITH
DETI THAT'S GOING TO HELP
TENANTS.
I HOPE THAT TO DO GO AHEAD WITH
THE NEXT PHASE AND AND FUND
MORE PLANNING.
THANK YOU
.
MY NAME IS ALEX COHEN.
I'M A RENTER IN THE FOURTH
WARD.
I JUST MOVED BACK TO ANN ARBOR
ABOUT A YEAR AGO.
I WAS LIVING IN MINNESOTA FOR A
FEW YEARS BEFORE THAT.
I'M FLOORED BY THE NUMBER
OF MULTIDAY OUTAGES I'VE
ENCOUNTERED.
IT SEEMS LIKE ALL THE PEOPLE IN
THIS ROOM ARE YOU WE'RE ALL FOR
MOVING IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION.
GREAT GREAT ENERGY, GREAT
MUNICIPAL IZATION, WONDERFUL
STICKING IT TO YES.
ALL I'M HEARING IS THAT IT'S
ALL GOING TO TAKE A LONG TIME
AND I SHUDDER TO THINK HOW MANY
MULTIDAY OUTAGES I'M GOING TO
EXPERIENCE.
LIKE I WAS LIKE I GET TO MOVE
BACK TO ANN ARBOR.
GREAT.
LIKE I FINALLY ARRIVED AND I'M
JUST LIKE PART OF THAT IS NOW
GOING TO BE EXPERIENCING
INEVITABLE MULTIDAY OUTAGES.
SO I DOUBT THERE'S A QUICK
ADDRESS AS SIMPLE AS LIKE
FIGURING OUT WHICH BRANCHES
NEED TO BE TRIMMED IN THE NEXT
YEAR OR TWO WHILE WE WAIT FOR
ALL THESE AMAZING LONG TERM
THINGS.
BUT I'D LOVE IT IF SOMEBODY
COULD JUST LOOK INTO THAT TOO.
THANK YOU.
THANK KYLE.
FIVE THIRTY MILLER AVENUE.
I'M GOING TO SUGGEST THAT YOU
ADOPT TWO APPROACHES TO THE
FEASIBILITY STUDY WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT TONIGHT.
THESE APPROACHES MAY SOUND
CONTRADICTORY BUT I THINK THEY
REPRESENT A REASONABLE WAY TO
LOOK AT EXPERT REPORTS FIRST
FOLLOW THE RECOMMENDATION
OF THE STUDY THAT YOUR EXPERTS
PRODUCED.
BUT SECOND, DON'T SETTLE FOR
THE LIMITATIONS SUGGESTED BY
THOSE EXPERTS.
SO THE EXPERTS ARE SAYING WE
NEED TO MOVE AHEAD WITH THE
PHASE TWO FEASIBILITY STUDY.
THEY'RE ALSO SAYING AT THE SAME
TIME LET'S START TO THE YOU I
FEEL LIKE THE THIS STUDY IN
MANY IS MAY HAVE PUT BACK THE
SIU BY QUITE A BIT OF TIME
BECAUSE I THOUGHT THE CITY WAS
ABOUT READY TO LAUNCH IT WHEN
WHEN THIS STUDY WAS STARTED AND
I THINK THEY HAD THE DATA TO DO
THAT WELL BACK THEN.
BUT MOVING FORWARD LET'S LAUNCH
THE SIU AND FUND THE PHASE TWO
FEASIBILITY STUDY.
BUT LET ME TURN TO SOME OF THE
LIMITATIONS FIRST OF ALL IN
TERMS OF THE FEASIBILITY STUDY
SUGGESTS THAT IT'S UNLIKELY
THAT THE MUNICIPALITY CAN
MUNICIPAL UTILITY CAN BE
ESTABLISHED BY 20 30 TO JUSTIFY
THIS CLAIM.
THEY REFER TO A REPORT
CONDUCTED FOR DC THAT LOOKED AT
FOUR CASE STUDIES BUT ONE
OF THOSE CASE STUDIES, WINTER
PARK, FLORIDA WAS ABLE TO
MUNICIPALITIES FOR TWO YEARS.
THAT'S NOT A YOU KNOW, THAT'S
NOT A SIX YEAR OLD KIND
OF VENTURE AND ANOTHER
WASHINGTON JEFFERSON COUNTY AND
WASHINGTON DIDN'T EVEN HAVE TO
GO TO COURT ABOUT IT.
THEY SETTLED WITH THE UTILITY.
WE DON'T KNOW HOW LONG IT'S
GOING TO TAKE TILL WE ENTERED
INTO THAT PROCESS, BUT I THINK
WE SHOULD WE SHOULDN'T LIMIT
OURSELVES TO THIS NOTION THAT
IT HAS TO BE, YOU KNOW, LONGER
THAN THE TWENTY THIRTY EIGHT.
THE OTHER THING ANOTHER
LIMITATION IS IS THE
LIMITATIONS THAT THEY PRESENTED
AROUND WHAT COULD HAPPEN WITH A
SEIYU.
THEY SUGGESTED 10 PERCENT
OF THE CITY'S ELECTRICITY COULD
COME FROM THE CITY BY TWENTY
THIRTY.
BUT WE KNOW THAT AS MUCH AS 30
PERCENT OF THE CITY'S ENERGY
THERE'S CAPACITY FOR THAT AND
SO WE SHOULD SET HIGHER HOURS
FOR THAT TO NOT LIMIT OURSELVES
TO JUST THE 10 PERCENT.
ANOTHER LIMITATION IS THIS REX
IDEA THE THOUGHT THAT
PURCHASING RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS FROM MY PERSPECTIVE
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS IS
NOT THE SAME AS EMISSION
REDUCTION.
THEY'RE SCHRADE AND AS
RENEWABLE PRICES CONTINUE TO
DROP THEY BECOME NOT ONLY A
TRADE BUT A HOAX.
HEY, THEY'RE MAY HAVE BEEN A
TIME WHERE RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS PROMOTED THE
DEVELOPMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
PROJECTS BUT CURRENTLY
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES ARE
THE MOST AFFORDABLE SOURCE
OF ELECTRICITY.
I DON'T WANT MY TAX DOLLARS
WASTED ON SOLAR OR WIND
PROJECTS THAT WOULD BE BUILT
ANYWAY.
SIR, YOUR TIME'S UP, I'M
AFRAID.
THANK YOU MUCH.
THE BEEP WAS THIRTY SECONDS
LEFT TO GO I'M AFRAID NOTHING
OF A CHANGE OF LIGHT WAS THIRTY
SECONDS TO GO.
OK MY APOLOGIES NEVER WHERE I
SENT YOU THE HOME WE DO AT
NICELY THANK YOU JERRY NELSON
HOUSE WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT A
PUBLIC COMMENT
.
THANK YOU MAYOR TAYLOR TENGGARA
SECOND WORD IT'S LATE AND
YOU'VE HEARD A LOT AND THERE
ARE PEOPLE ON LINE WAITING TO
SPEAK SO I'LL BE BRIEF AND TRY
TO SAY SOMETHING PERHAPS NEW.
I THINK MAY REALLY HAS A KEY
QUESTION ABOUT GOING CONCERN
AND STRANDED COSTS.
THAT REALLY IS WHERE THE
DISTANCES BETWEEN THE LOW AND
THE HIGH ESTIMATE THAT WE SEE
IN THIS REPORT FROM FIVE WEEKS
AND DOUJIN.
SOME OF IT IS ON THE GROUND
EVALUATION OF PHYSICAL ASSETS
BUT MOST OF IT IS A LEGAL
QUESTION ABOUT HOW WE ARE GOING
TO ESTABLISH EVALUATE PORTION
OF THESE ASSETS.
YOU KNOW, BOOK VALUE VERSUS NET
EARNINGS.
HOW ARE WE GOING TO DETERMINE
STRANDED COSTS AND GOING
CONCERN AND SO THAT'S THE BIG
UNCERTAINTY.
SO I JUST WANT TO REMIND YOU
WHAT JONATHAN COHN FROM BOULDER
TOLD ENERGY COMMISSION BACK
WHEN HE APPEARED IN OCTOBER IN
TWENTY TWENTY ONE STANDARD
OFTEN GOING CONCERN GET THROWN
AROUND WITH THESE HUGE
SPECTER'S THAT WILL KILL
NATIONALIZATION EFFORT.
I WORRY THAT THIS WILL HAPPEN
HERE TO MNUCHIN DEFINE STANDARD
FOR US MOSTLY IT'S THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CURRENT
RETAIL SALES AND WHAT HE COULD
GET WHOLESALE MARKET FOR THE
ELECTRICITY CAN NO LONGER
SALT-AND-PEPPER OVER TIME
ACCORDING TO FIRST FORMULA.
A LOT OF VARIABLES HERE BUT
THEY ALL ASSUME THE KEY WILL
NOT BE ABLE TO FIND NEW RETAIL
CUSTOMERS FOR THIS LEFTOVER
POWER GENERATION.
PLEASE NO.
AND MR. COHEN SAID THIS
TECHNOLOGY ADMISSION THAT FIRST
REQUIRES THE UTILITY TO TAKE
ALL STEPS TO ELIMINATE STRANDED
COSTS IT HAS TO PROVE THAT IT
HAS DONE EVERYTHING TO MITIGATE
THESE COSTS AND PROVING IT
CAN'T SELL REDUCED CAPACITY TO
OTHER NATIVE CUSTOMERS.
NOW REMEMBER THE DTA SHUTTING
DOWN COAL PLANTS IN
RIVER IN
TWENTY TWENTY EIGHT AND IN NO
MORE IN TWENTY TWENTY THREE
BOTH AHEAD OF SCHEDULE IT WILL
BE TRYING TO REPLACE THAT
CAPACITY UNFORTUNATELY MOSTLY
WITH GAS.
BUT THE POINT IS THAT IT'S NOT
ITS PROBLEM.
IT'S NOT TOO MUCH CAPACITY AND
IT'S GOING TO BE IT'S TOO
LITTLE.
SO I REALLY CAN PROVE TO FURCH
THAT LOSING ANOTHER WILL RESULT
IN ANY STANDING CAPACITY AND WE
MAY NOT HAVE ANY STRANDED
ASSETS TO PAY FOR REGARDING
GROWING CONCERN THERE IS NO
FORMULA AND YOU KNOW AND VERY
LITTLE PRECEDENT AS WE JUST
HEARD FOR EVALUATING BOEING
CONTRACT WHICH IS LOST PROFITS
BASICALLY FOR GTE AND I THINK
THIS ALSO HAS THE POTENTIAL TO
BE FOR MONGERED AND I THINK WE
NEED TO THAT YOU KNOW, WE HAVE
TO LOOK AT WHATEVER LEVEL
OF EVIDENCE THERE IS VERY
DISPASSIONATELY AND COME TO A
CONCLUSION THAT I PERSONALLY
THINK THAT I UNDERSTAND WE'RE
SEEING ON THE ON THE NEW GEN
EVALUATION ARE VERY UNREALISTIC
GIVEN THE FACT.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLICLY
TO SPEAK OF THE PUBLIC COMMENT
IS IS THERE ANYONE I KNOW I
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK TO PUBLIC
COMMENT
HERE.
I DO NOT SEE ANYONE WITH THEIR
HAND RAISED
SEE NO ONE PUBLICLY
DISCLOSED OR THEIR
COMMUNICATIONS TO FROM COUNCIL
COULD A MOTION TO ADJOURN OH
THAT A COMMUNICATION OR MOTION.
I JUST WANTED TO BRIEFLY THANK
EVERYBODY FOR COMING OUT AND
SPEAKING TONIGHT.
I KNOW THAT THIS HAS BEEN AN
ISSUE OF HUGE COMMUNITY
INTEREST FOR A LONG TIME WE'VE
BEEN TALKING ABOUT IT AND
ENERGY COMMISSION AT THIS TABLE
AND AT EVENTS THROUGHOUT THE
COMMUNITY AND SO THANK YOU FOR
COMING OUT AND SPEAKING OUT AND
OBVIOUSLY THIS IS THE BEGINNING
OF THIS CONVERSATION FOR US AS
IT WAS A PRETTY HEFTY REPORT
FOR US TO GET INTO AND TO DOVE
INTO AND ASK MORE QUESTIONS
ABOUT.
BUT I JUST REALLY WANT TO THANK
EVERYBODY FOR COMING OUT AND
SPEAKING TONIGHT AND AND THEN
AND THEN UNRELATED I WILL
BRIEFLY SAY BECAUSE
OF TONIGHT'S SPECIAL SESSION
COUNCIL MEMBER GWYNEDD AND I
HAD TO RESCHEDULE OUR
COFFEE HOUR FROM TONIGHT.
SO IT IS NOW I BELIEVE
OCTOBER 24TH.
SO THAT IS THE NEXT TIME YOU
CAN SEE ASML CREATE FURTHER
COMMUNICATION FROM COUNCIL
CASPERSON I THINK I HAVE A
PROCESS QUESTION.
I DON'T KNOW IF THIS FITS
BECAUSE I WAS THINKING OF MORE
QUESTIONS AFTER YOU COLLECT
QUESTIONS YOUR QUESTIONS ARE
ALWAYS WELCOME BUT THEN THEY
WOULD HAVE BEEN A STAFF MEMBER
LIKE THEY WOULD FOR CITY
COUNCIL MEETINGS IF IF
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS COME OUT
OF THE PRESENTATION OR TONIGHT
AND ARE DIRECTED AT STAFF THEN
WILL THEY BE COLLATED AND
PRESENTED BACK TO COMMUNITY IN
SOME FASHION BECAUSE THIS IS A
WORK SESSION DIFFERENT FROM A
CITY COUNCIL MEETING?
THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
I DON'T KNOW THE ANSWER TO THAT
.
THIS CONSULTANT HAS OFFERED NO
FURTHER QUESTIONS.
WHAT DO YOU WRITE ABOUT SO YOU
CAN SPECIFIC QUESTIONS.
OK, CELTEL COUNCIL IS MY
ANSWER.
OK, THANK YOU.
THAT'S MY COMMENT THAT WILL
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR FURTHER
COMMUNICATION FROM COUNCIL
EVERY MOTION ADJOURN MOVI
HARRISON FISH DISCUSSION PAPER
POSED RETURNED